See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380746388

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains
Article in Afet ve Risk Dergisi · May 2024
DOI: 10.35341/afet.1361151

CITATIONS

READS

0

968

1 author:
Veli Ahmet Cevik
Hitit University
19 PUBLICATIONS 20 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Veli Ahmet Cevik on 01 August 2024.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Research Article

Journal of Disaster and Risk
7(2), 2024, (368-391)

Received: 15.09.2023
Accepted: 19.05.2024
Published: 31.07.2024

e-ISSN: 2636-8390
DOI: 10.35341/afet.1361151

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains
Veli Ahmet Çevik1
Abstract
While the global public is struggling with Covid-19 and the subsequent inflation, war and energy crisis,
climate change has turned into a forgotten crisis. However, with the increasing number of disasters caused
by extreme weather events in different continents of the world, climate change has started to attract
attention all over the world. Extreme weather events such as global warming, floods and hurricanes, which
are the result of global climate change, not only affect the lives of societies, but also affect logistics and
supply chains. The first spots to see the effects of extreme weather conditions as a result of climate change
are the production centers in different parts of the world and the international logistics sector, which
ensures that the goods produced in these facilities reach the markets. By this study, the qualitative effects
of climate change on supply chains were investigated and this research is expected to shed light on the
effects of climate change on international logistics activities.
Keywords: Climate Change, Global Warming, Logistics, Supply Chain

1. INTRODUCTION
Climate change, which is felt more and more each year, has been overshadowed by the
coronavirus pandemic, which emerged in China in the last days of 2019 and damaged the global
economy much more severely than the global financial crisis that broke out in 2008 (Gopinath,
2020; URL 1). While the governments were struggling with the global health crisis, which was
caught unprepared, global warming turned into a forgotten crisis. However, towards the end of
2021, with the decrease of the effects of the global pandemic, the issue of climate change has
started to attract attention again. In a study conducted in Germany in which respondents were
asked to select the two most important issues among the twelve issues facing the country, from
social policy to the economy, climate change was at the top of the list by 43% of the respondents,
followed by coronavirus with 38% (URL 2). The effects of the pandemic have eased, but this time,
climate change continues to be overshadowed due to global inflation, war and energy crisis.
Undoubtedly, the increase in air temperatures in recent years has a large share in the increasing
interest of societies against climate change. Because the last eight years have been the warmest
years since the 1800s, when global temperature records were started to be kept, and even 2021
has been recorded as the fifth warmest year (URL 3).
Bigger, more complex and more uncertain than other environmental problems, climate change is
affecting agriculture, energy use, health and many aspects of nature, which means it affects
everything and everyone. The causes and consequences of climate change are very diverse (Tol,
1 Lecturer, Dr., Hitit Uni., Osmancık Ömer Derindere Vocational School, Depart. of Management and Organization, Logistics Prog, Çorum

E-mail: veliahmetcevik@hitit.edu.tr ORCID No: 0000-0003-1981-7275
To cite this article
Çevik, V. A. (2024). Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains.
Journal of Disaster and Risk, 7(2), 368-391.

368

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

2009). Rising temperatures, persistent multi-year and severe droughts, storms, rising sea levels,
melting glaciers and warming oceans in connection with climate change affect human activities
and bottleneck global supply chains, which is the focus of this study. The globalized production
system, characterized by low transportation costs, economies of scale and comparative
advantages, has increased the links between producers and consumers all over the world
(Andreoni and Miola, 2015). Floods, hurricanes, high temperatures and forest fires that have
emerged in different parts of the world in recent years affect one link of global supply chains, and
this effect carries the risk of spreading to the entire network. Supply chains have a vital role in the
development of global economies. Evaluating the economic consequences of disruptions in the
regular flow of goods and services of global climate change is becoming more and more important
for macroeconomic analyzes and economic policies. In this context, various central banks have
begun to assess the consequences of climate change on the conduct of monetary policy,
recognizing that supply shocks related to, for example, extreme weather events can strike a
balance between stable inflation or output (Cœuré, 2018).
On the other hand, activities such as production, transportation, storage and distribution carried
out in supply chains have serious effects on climate change.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Chapter 3, climate change is examined in
general terms. In Chapter 4, the effects of climate change on the supply chains and the effects on
the main activity areas of the supply chain are investigated. The study was based on existing
secondary sources, including books, regional and international reports, scientific journals, news
articles and internet resources highlighting climate change-related supply chain issues, and
expert interview.
In this study, the qualitative effects of climate change on supply chains were investigated and this
research is expected to shed light on the effects of climate in international logistics activities.
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Climate change has been a recognized issue throughout history, but as a science, theory and
evidence have been studied for the last two centuries. In the 1820s, French physicist and
mathematician Joseph Fourier, realizing that the atmosphere traps heat, studied the heat balance
equations for the Earth. He concluded that the planet was about 30°C hotter than these equations
suggest, arguing that something was blocking the energy output (Stern, 2015).
In recent years, climate change has become one of the most important challenges at practically all
levels of decision-making, both governmental and private. Climate change, which is a result of
global warming, is a universal reality that affects the life of human societies, business activities
and the environment itself in many ways (Stern et al., 2010). The mid-1990s work of William
Nordhaus on an integrated quantitative assessment model to explain the relationship between
the economy and climate earned him the 2018 Nobel Prize in Economics (URL 4). Academic
studies in the context of supply chains and climate change have been evaluated from many
different perspectives. These studies can be divided into two groups as the effects of supply chain
activities on climate change and the effects of climate change on supply chain activities. In the
context of the effects of supply chain activities on climate change, Solaymani (2019) examined the
CO2 emission models and the transportation sector in the seven economies that emit the most
carbon in his study. Zhang et al. (2018) investigated the analysis of an optimal mass transit
structure under carbon emission constraint on a case in China. Wan and his team (2018)
369

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

presented solutions and policy recommendations regarding the decarbonization of the
international shipping industry.
The effects of climate change, which is also the subject of this research, on supply chain activities
have started to attract the attention of researchers in recent years. In a systematic literature
review on the management of climate change risks in global supply chains by Ghadge et al. (2020),
90 interdisciplinary articles were reviewed between 2005 and 2018. It is seen that more than 30%
of these studies were carried out between 2015 and 2018. A large number of studies have been
carried out on food supply chains, which are among the areas where the effects of climate change
are seen most rapidly. Godde et al. (2021) studied the effects of climate change on animal based
food supply chains and emphasized that climate change will have effects throughout the supply
chain, from agricultural production to storage, transportation and human consumption.
Parajuli et al. (2019), in face of climate change investigated how fruit and vegetable production
supply chains could remain environmentally sustainable. In order to reduce possible losses in the
processing chain due to extreme and variable weather conditions, they suggested increasing the
capacity of processing facilities such as storage, transportation and logistics in the supply chain.
Pankratz and Schiller (2021) investigated climate change and adaptation in global supply chain
networks and suggested that extreme weather events in the regions where suppliers are located
lead to a decrease in the operating performance of suppliers and their customers.
Izaguirre and her colleagues (2021), in their study investigating climate change risk to global port
operations, revealed coastal flooding and overflows caused by sea level rise and heat stress effects
of high temperatures as the main factors affecting port operations. In their research Becker et al.
(2018), examining the effects of climate change on maritime, they recommended that a wide range
of stakeholders operating in ports and related supply chains be in communication regarding
adaptation to climate change. In their literature review research Ryley et al. (2020), examining
the effects of climate change on aviation, they emphasized the importance of the participation of
more stakeholders operating in the aviation industry in the development and implementation of
adaptation plans against climate change risks. Their research on adapting railway maintenance to
climate change, Garmabaki et al. (2021) concluded that it is important to implement effective
climate adaptation approaches, including awareness.
In the context of the effects of climate change, although industries such as supply chains, maritime
and ports, aviation and railway are examined separately, the effects of climate change on all modes
of transport are clearly lacking as a whole and there is an obvious need for a general framework.
To address this research gap, supply chain and logistics operations are considered as a whole in
this study.
3. CLIMATE CHANGE
Natural disasters have occurred throughout history. However, it is now becoming more frequent,
more intense, and more importantly, more predictable.
Climate change refers to long-term changes in the Earth's local, regional and global temperatures
and weather patterns. Global warming, which is used in the same sense as climate change, but is
one of the consequences of climate change, is caused by the use of fossil fuels, which increase the
levels of greenhouse gases that trap heat in the atmosphere and increase the average surface
370

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

temperature of the Earth as a result of human activities. These temperature increases, directly or
indirectly caused by humans, are generally called global warming (URL 5, URL 6.)
Especially in the 20th century, the rapid increase in industrialization and the ability to travel
around the world with unprecedented efficiency, the ability to trade commodities and share
information have accelerated global warming. According to estimates, about 90% of world trade
is transported by ships. In 2019, 11 billion tons of goods were loaded at world ports and the global
trade value of goods exported to the whole world was approximately 19 trillion US dollars (URL
7). Humanity has depended more and more on fossil fuels since the Industrial Revolution 200
years ago. Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels have increased steadily since then,
accumulating in the Atmosphere, warming the planet, and net emissions have increased by 40%
over the past 30 years (URL 8). Although the subject of this study is the impact of climate change
on supply chains, the global greenhouse gas emissions caused by the sectors are shown in Figure
1.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Economic Sectors

Other Energy
10%
Industry
24%
Electricity
and Heat
Production 23%

Agriculture,
Forestry, and
Other Land Use
22%

Transportation
15%

Buildings
6%

Figure 1.Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Economic Sectors ( URL 9)

Climate change makes itself felt with different dangers and these dangers affect businesses in
different parts of the world in very different ways (Table 1).
The potential threats of climate change are given in Table 1. Many of these threats continue to
threaten societies and businesses in different geographies.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established in 1988 by the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) with
the goal of providing scientific data to all levels of government for the development of climate
policies. With the founding of the IPCC, the process of developing global action to manage climate
change began more than three decades ago. The IPCC was created to offer a concise scientific
371

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

summary of what is currently known about climate change. It has produced six main evaluation
reports in 1990, 1995, 2001, 2007, 2014 and 2022.
Table 1. Operations Risk Indicators (Mazzacurati et al., 2017)
Climate Hazard

Description

Heat Stress

Increase in temperature

Water Stress

Extreme Precipitation

Wildfire

Sea level rise

Cyclones, Hurricanes,
Typhoons

Socio-economic
vulnerability

Potential Business Impacts
 Rising costs of energy for cooling
 Heightened risk of brownouts/power outages
 Decreased labor productivity
 Negative impacts on human health/ labor
force

Fluctuation in water supply
and demand

 Reduced supply/ Increased costs
 Interrupted business
 Damaged reputation
 Losted jobs & customers

 Impairment of Property and Infrastructure
 Compromised infrastructure
Events of heavy rain
 Delayed projects
 Disrupted operations
 Constant decline in property value
Change in fire conditions
 Increased insurance losses
 Flooding problems and damaged physical
Elevated storm surge,
assets
intensified by the escalation
 Permanent loss of property value
of sea levels.
 Costs of moving operations
 Severe property damage
Exposure extreme weather  Constant decline in property value
phenomenon
 Costs of moving operations
 Losses in value added operations
Social upheaval, population  Disruptions in operations, physical assets
movement or economic
damages
disruption exacerbated or
 Impact on on the labor force
intensified by the influences  Social acceptance to operate
of climate change

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was created at the Rio
Earth Summit in 1992 to coordinate action on climate change. UNFCCC parties have met annually
at Conferences of the Parties (COPs) since 1995. COP 1 was held in Berlin, with an agreement on
"Jointly Implemented Actions", the first joint measures in international climate action (Breidenich
et al., 1998). The third COP was held in 1997 in Kyoto and the Kyoto Protocol, which entered into
force in 2005, was adopted. The Paris Climate Agreement was signed at COP 21 held in Paris in
2015. The COP26 UN Climate Change Conference, which was planned to be held in Glasgow in
2020 by the UK in partnership with Italy, was postponed due to Covid-19 and held in 2021. The
COP27 took place in 2022 in Egypt and The COP28 held in Dubai, the United Arab Emirates (UAE)
in 2023. The COP29 is scheduled in Bakü, Azerbaijan in November 2024.

372

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

4. IMPACT ON SUPPLY CHAIN
Lambert et al. (1998) defined the concept of supply chain, which has many different definitions in
the literature, as the harmony of companies that bring products or services to the market. Supply
chain management, on the other hand, is the coordination of activities within and between
vertically linked firms in order to profitably serve their end customers (Larson and Rogers, 1998).
According to The Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals (CSCMP), ‘‘Supply chain
management encompasses the planning and management of all activities involved in sourcing and
procurement, conversion, and all logistics management activities’’ (URL 10). As can be understood
from the definitions above, the activities of processing raw materials in any corner of the world in
different geographies and serving them to consumers in many different places constitute the
subject of the supply chain. With the decrease in transportation costs for the last 50 years,
developments in communication technologies and the spread of just-in-time production
philosophy, outsourcing has increased and production can be made in geographies that are far
from the markets. Such a level of complexity and interconnectedness of supply chains reduced
costs considerably when things were on track, but in the case of a risk, this supply network can
pose great challenges to businesses. The most severe of these difficulties was witnessed by the
whole world in the Covid 19 pandemic. In addition to the pandemic, the gigantic container ship
agrounded in the Suez Canal almost brought Asia-Europe trade to a halt.
The supply chain does not only cover production and supply activities, but also includes other
activities such as transportation, warehousing and retail, as understood from the above
definitions. These core activities cover other components such as people, technology, knowledge
transfer and adding value. Exposure of the activities and components of a supply chain to one of
the climate change factors at any point in the world can bring the entire operation in the chain to
a halt.
In fact, nature's disruption of supply chains is not a new phenomenon. Dealing with extreme
weather events such as floods, droughts and storms began long before corporations became
popular in the 19th century. For many firms, the physical impact of climate change will affect them
more through disaster-affected suppliers or flooded transportation routes, rather than their own
operations (URL 11). The Western Pacific is home to a significant portion of semiconductor supply
chains, with the probability of devastating hurricanes occurring once in 100 years likely to double
or even quadruple by 2040. Such hurricanes have the potential to wipe out about 30% of their
income by causing months of production loss for businesses in the geography where they occur.
Heavy rare earth mining in Southeast China is also likely to face major challenges with the
increased probability of heavy rainfall (URL 12).
The increasing effects of climate change have led governments, businesses and other stakeholders
to take steps towards climate change. Established at Stanford University in 2022, the School of
Sustainability will focus on a range of disciplines, from research to new technologies and climate
policy study (URL 13). On the other hand, in an open letter ahead of the G7 summit in Germany in
2022, more than ten global big company executives called for ambitious government climate
policies that offer clarity and stability to the private sector (URL 14). These developments are
examples of the steps taken by different sectors towards climate change. Climate change factors
such as the steps taken by governments and the changing purchasing behavior of consumers pose
threats and opportunities to businesses and supply chain networks (Figure 2) (Dasaklis and
Pappis, 2013). In a study conducted in 28 countries in 2019, 69% of the participants said that they
made a change in consumer behavior due to climate change concerns (URL 15).
373

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains
*Differentiated
products and
services
*New markets
*New technologies
*Value Creation
*Clean energy
*Resource
efficiency
*Better company
performance

Climate Change Opportunities

Information

Cash Flow
Supplier

Manufacturer

Distributor
s

Retailers

Customer
r

Material Flow
Reverse Material Flow

Climate Change Threats

GHG
Emissions

Carbon
Management
*International accords
*Litigation risk
*Shareholder’s value
* Environmental
sensitive of customers
*Disruption
*Physical impacts
*Raw materials’
scarcity/shortage
*Health, welfare,
security threats
*Vulnerable ecosystems

Figure 2. Climate Change Threats and Opportunities for Supply Chain Networks (Dasaklis and Pappis,
2013; URL 9, URL 16)

4.1. Production and Storage
The factors required for production are labor, capital, land and entrepreneurship (Karagül, 2014).
Climate change has the potential to affect all of these factors. If the living areas of the employees
in the production centers are affected by natural disasters, it is inevitable that the businesses they
work will also affect them. On the other hand, societies had to migrate from their places of
residence due to extreme weather conditions. Between 2008 and 2016, abrupt weather events
like floods, storms, forest fires, and excessive temperatures resulted in the forcible displacement
of 21.5 million people annually on average (URL 17).
International management consulting firm McKinsey has grouped the socioeconomic impact of
climate change in a five-system framework: livability and workability, food systems, physical
assets, infrastructure services and natural capital (URL 18).
Of the hazards listed in Table 1, the temperature factor may affect people's ability to work
outdoors. Between 1992 and 2016, approximately 70,000 workers were seriously injured and
more than 700 lost their lives due to extreme heat in the USA (Tanglis and Devine, 2018).
Physical assets such as buildings that constitues production centers of enterprises can be
damaged or destroyed by dangers such as excessive precipitation, floods and forest fires. In 2011,
more than 270 factories were damaged in five industrial estates in the flood disaster that occurred
in Thailand (URL 19). Infrastructure services are also damaged due to extreme weather events.
Other energy production and transmission tools, especially electricity and natural gas services,
374

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

suffer, too. According to the IPCC's 6th Assessment Report (URL 9), the hotter summer climate in
Asian countries and the increasing population cause a rapid increase in the demand for energy for
cooling (URL 20). For example, the Japanese government, after warning in March 2022, called on
businesses and people in the Tokyo area to cut electricity use with a second warning in June, as
the heat wave increased the use of air conditioners.
Climate change is changing ecosystems and destroying natural capitals such as forests and oceans
that contribute significantly to societies. Because trees keep greenhouse gases out of the
atmosphere, forests are critical to limiting the damage of climate change. Agriculture, forestry and
related sectors contribute 21% of global greenhouse gas emissions, of which 45% come from
deforestation for economic activity (URL 20). Global Canopy, one of the non-profit environmental
groups, analyzed the environmental programs of 350 companies working in the forestry, land use
and agriculture sectors, which have a major impact on the world's forests, within the framework
of the United Nations' Race to Zero 2030 breakthroughs. It has been found that 148 of these
companies have committed to net zero, but only nine have made strong progress in preventing
deforestation (URL 21) In addition, leaders of Unilever and Nestlé companies in the global food
industry have committed to achieving deforestation-free supply chains by the end of 2025 (URL
22).
In today's international trade, raw materials and intermediate products are brought together from
different parts of the world with the philosophy of just-in-time manufacturing and presented to
the end user. Certain products have clustered production centers in certain countries or even in
different regions of these countries. Risks increase when suppliers are clustered in certain
regions. About 70% of the world's smartphones are concentrated in one region of China. Another
region is home to half of global laptop production (URL 23). The world has witnessed this problem
in the latest Covid-19 outbreak. It is estimated that at least 51,000 companies operating in
different parts of the world have a first-tier supplier in the Wuhan region of China, where the
pandemic first appeared, and at least five million companies around the world have at least one
second-tier supplier (Çevik and Durukan, 2021).
Severe freeze in Texas in February 2021 caused the largest power outage in US history. These cuts
have exacerbated the semiconductor shortage triggered by the global pandemic, and key suppliers
of the automotive industry dependent on microchips have had to close their factories (URL 24).
Sea level rise is one of the most important effects of climate change. Future rates of sea level rise
have caught the world's attention. Countries, particularly those in low-lying areas and small
islands, are worried that flooding and coastal erosion would limit their land area, and at worst, a
sizable portion of their population may be compelled to emigrate (Mimura, 2013).
According to the United Nations report, approximately one in ten of the world's population lives
in coastal areas less than 10 meters above sea level, and approximately 40% of the world's
population lives in an area 100 km from the coast (URL 25). Sea level rise is considered the most
serious threat that climate change poses to China's coastal regions. Over the past century, China
has experienced a sustained trend of sea level rise, with a total rise in sea levels of about 20-30 cm
and an average annual rise of 2.5 mm (Cui et al., 2018). China's 11 coastal provinces occupy only
13.5% of the land area, accounting for 45.22% of the national GDP and more than 41% of the
population by 2021 (URL 26).
Damage to structures, equipment, vehicles used for transportation, raw materials, components,
and products, as well as decreased or suspended production, have an immediate impact on many
375

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

medium-sized businesses. The main reason for this is that the machines are permanently installed,
which can hardly be protected if water enters the first floor. Therefore, production will be
interrupted rapidly (Leitold et al., 2021). The increase in production in the world and the growth
in e-commerce have increased the number of warehouses and transfer centers. These centers,
where raw materials, intermediate products and final products are stored, are generally large
closed areas and characteristic structures that are not very high from the ground. These facilities
are vulnerable to flooding and extreme weather events. Electricity, natural gas and
telecommunications infrastructures are the backbone of both generation and storage facilities.
Recent studies show that when power outages are included, economic losses from flood-induced
business disruption are 300% higher (Koks et al., 2019). Droughts in recent years have seriously
damaged electricity production. Severe storms will damage fragile power grids and natural gas
supply systems that is not designed to operate at certain temperatures. Similarly, it will damage
critical equipment in gas and coal power plants, wind turbines and pipelines, disrupting critical
infrastructures of generation and storage systems.
Extreme heat and drought as a result of climate change affect many different regions from the
European continent to China. According to the report of the European Union Joint Research
Center, Europe is experiencing the driest time of 500 years in August 2022 and more than 60
percent of land in the EU is under drought warnings or alerts (URL 27). Drought seriously affects
agriculture, energy and global material production. Cooling water is of vital importance for
thermal power plants that provide about 80% of the world's electricity. In the USA, it is estimated
that 41% of the amount of fresh water used in power plants in 2005 was used for electricity
generation, primarily for cooling (Zhou et al., 2018). China, which has been heading towards a
water crisis in recent years, has 20% of the world's population but only 7% of the world's fresh
water resources. The country, which is the production center of the world, is structurally
insufficient in water resources and electrical power to sustain its economy (URL 28). The longest
river in Asia, the Yangtze, reached a record low, causing major companies such as Toyota and
Foxconn to shut down factory operations for at least a week due to outages in hydroelectric power
plants (URL 29). Considering the weight of the country in the global economy, potential waterrelated disruptions that started in China will shock the food, energy and material markets around
the world and create economic and political turmoil in the coming years (URL 30).
High temperatures, which reduce productivity, tend to reduce both agriculture and manufacturing
exports, and hurricanes, which reduce national incomes, tend to reduce imports. The spatial
distribution of climatic conditions in extensive trade networks has the potential to have an impact
on market pricing through both effects on supply costs and affects on demand (Carleton and
Hsiang, 2016).
4.2. Transportation
Transport is an important sector that contributes to the smooth functioning of societies and
ensures the economic development of a nation (Vajjarapu et al., 2019). The lockdown periods that
started with the Covid 19 pandemic once again emphasized the great importance of the
transportation industry. The transportation sector, which is in a key position to ensure an
uninterrupted flow of goods and the continuation of world trade, needs to be prepared in advance
for the increasing effects of climate change day by day. Climate change impact types and possible
consequences in terms of transportation are given in Table 2.

376

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

Table 2. Types of Climate Change Impacts, Possible Consequences for Transport (Nemry and Demirel,
2012)
Climate impact
Increased Summer Temperatures
Increased Winter Temperatures

Increased Precipitation and floodings

Increased and more frequent extreme
winds

Sea Level Rise and sea storm surges

Change in frequency of Winter Storms
Permafrost degradation abnd thawing
Reduced Arctic sea ice Cover
Earlier River Ice Breakup

Overview of potential impact on transport system
 Deterioration of asphalt, Railway Track Expansion, change
in the takingoff distance and required airport runway
length, lack of navigable water, thermal expansion of
bridges, superheating of diesel engine
 Alleviating limitations on road and rail maintenance
 Modified construction seasons
 Inundation of terrestrial transportation infrastructures,
dampened road surfaces, and hazards to safety.
 Erosion of embankments, scouring of bridges, and
submergence of subterranean transit systems.
 Increased occurrence of slushflow avalanches, landslides,
and related vulnerabilities.
 Impairment of transportation-related infrastructure such
as roadways, railways, pipelines, maritime ports, and
aviation facilities.
 Vulnerabilities in cable-supported bridges, signage,
elevated cables, railway signaling, and towering structures.
 Disruption of electronic transportation infrastructures
including signaling systems.
 Diminished safety conditions for vehicles driving.
 Degradation of coastal highways due to erosion.
 Elevated tides posing threats to port and harbor
installations, as well as low-level aviation infrastructure.
 Recurrent and sustained inundation.
 Scouring of bridges.
 Deterioration through corrosion.
 Less or more snow / ice for all modes
 Road, rail, airport, pipeline embankments failures
 New northern shipping routes Reduced ice loading on
structures, such as bridges or piers
 Ice-jam flooding risk

Climate change is likely to threaten transportation systems both temporarily through extreme
weather events and permanently through gradual changes (Markolf et al., 2019). Sudden extreme
weather events, floods and landslides can increase the risks of disruption in transportation
systems such as delays, disruptions, damage and malfunctions. Gabela and Sarmiento (2020)
investigated the effects of the 2013 floods in Germany on road freight transport and found that
23% of all main roads were damaged during floods. A study of the effects of the climate crisis on
critical infrastructure found that high temperatures alone will account for around 92% of total
hazard damage in Europe’s transport sector by 2080, largely as roads are built for cooler times.
(Forzieri vd., 2018). The increase in the number of floods and excessively snowy days on the
highways will shorten the economic life of the roads. More frequent maintenance, repair and
rebuilding activities will result in higher costs. For example, the African continent faces a cost of
US$183.6 billion to repair and maintain roads as a result of damage from temperature and
precipitation changes from potential climate change by 2100 (Chinowsky et al., 2011).
Extreme weather events cause great risks to rails, bridges, tunnels, energy and communication
systems, and extreme temperatures cause rails to buckle in railways and trains to derail or collide
377

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

(Rail Safety and Standards Board, 2003). In 2021, the financial impact of wildfires and heavy rains
on Union Pacific, North America's largest rail freight company, was approximately $100 million
as it caused gradual disruptions to the company's 32,000-mile network (URL 31).
Climate change also affects airport operations in different ways. The terminal and flight
operations will need to be modified due to variations in wind speed and direction, temperature,
and air density (Williams, 2016). In the "Climate Change Risk and Resilience" report prepared by
the European Air Navigation Safety Organization (Eurocontrol) (2013), the main potential risks
of climate change for the European aviation sector are as follows;
• Temperature increase
• Changes in precipitation (rain and snow)
• Changes in storm patterns
• Changes in wind patterns
• Sea level rise and storm surges
Analyzing the infrastructure of more than 14,000 airports worldwide and their exposure to storm
surges for current and future sea level, Yesudian and Dawson (2021) concluded that 269 airports
are currently at risk of coastal flooding. According to the aforesaid research, a temperature
increase of 2°C in line with the Paris Agreement will cause 100 airports to remain below the mean
sea level and 364 airports to face the risk of flooding. Airport operations may be interrupted or
halted by flooding of airport terminals, electricity and lighting infrastructure, navigation and
communication systems, inter-terminal transit, or runways. Because important utility
infrastructure is frequently underground, minor water leaks can harm fundamental components
(Burbidge, 2018). There are risks of climate change causing the following problems in aviation
operations (Eurocontrol, 2018);
• Aircraft performance changes
• Runway length issues
• Efficiency and flight range problems
• Demand redistribution (geographic)
• Redistribution of demand (seasonal)
• Increased cooling and heating requirements
• Heat damage to airport surfaces (runways and taxiways)
• Structural problems caused by changes in permafrost
Ports, which are the driving force of economic growth and development, play a significant role in
meeting human needs and in global trade. As more than 80% by volume of global trade in goods
are transported by sea, ports are crucial links in production, distribution and supply chains based
on low-cost transportation (URL 32). In 2021, the cargo and shipping activities of ports on the US
west coast supported more than 12 million jobs across the US and a total economic value of
approximately $2 trillion, accounting for approximately 8.7% of the nation's GDP (Martin
Associates, 2022). Ports are highly vulnerable to extreme weather conditions due to their nature
being built at sea level and serving in open areas. Disruption of port operations, with damage to
port infrastructures and equipment, will lead to disruption of supply chains and disruption to
trade globally. Hurricane Sandy, which hit the ports of New York and New Jersey in 2012,
disrupted maritime operations and facilities and caused approximately $2.2 billion in damage
(Smythe, 2013). In general, the maritime sector is affected by the increase in sea levels in port
activities and the increase in the severity of storms in voyage services (Asariotis and Benamara,
2012).

378

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

River transport, known as inland waterway transport, is also affected by extreme temperatures
with changing climate, similar to other modes of transport. In Europe, transportation could not be
carried out due to the fall in the water level in 2018 in the Rhine River, which connects Germany
and Switzerland to Rotterdam. Approximately 80% of inland waterway transport, which
constitutes 6% of Germany's total transport volume, takes place on the Rhine, the most important
inland waterway in Germany and Western Europe (Ademmer et al., 2020). The water level of 80
cm, which is necessary for the safe floating of the barges used in river transport, has decreased to
25 cm. The banks of the river, which is approximately 1200 km long, are home to some of
Germany's largest industrial companies, including the world's largest chemical plant. The
suspension of river transport due to drought caused industrial plants to cut production for several
weeks and gave the German economy a short-term shock (URL 33). In August 2022, the water
level dropped to 47 cm and the container ships had to carry some of their planned cargoes to avoid
running aground, resulting in high transportation costs and serious delays in deliveries (URL 34).
Although global warming negatively affects humanity, the melting of glaciers offers new business
opportunities in the Arctic region. Since the geographical distance between the continents is less
in the Arctic than in the southern regions, northern countries have started to build submarine
fiber optic cables in Arctic waters (URL 35). Furthermore, new transportation routes are emerging
as an alternative to the Suez Canal and Cape of Good Hope crossings in the Arctic region.
Alternative new routes in the North Pole provide approximately 35% distance savings compared
to traditional maritime trade routes (Çevik and Durukan, 2020).
4.3. Insurance
Climate change also affects the insurance industry. Businesses transfer the risks brought by
extreme weather conditions to insurance companies and as the risks increase, the premiums paid
increase. Between 1980 and 2020, extreme weather events caused 487 billion Euros of economic
loss in the member states of the European Environment Agency and accounted for approximately
80% of the total economic losses caused by natural disasters (URL 36). Global economic losses
from natural and man-made disasters increased from USD 150 billion in 2019 to USD 202 billion
in 2020. Estimated global insured losses from natural disasters in the first half of 2022 amounted
to USD 35 billion, exceeding the average of the last decade by 22% (Swiss Re, 2020; URL 37). The
increase in pandemics and natural disasters in recent years has also negatively affected
reinsurance companies, and some reinsurance companies have implemented a 12% premium
increase in property and casualty insurance, which includes natural disaster insurance and other
types of insurance, in July 2022 (URL 38).
4.4. Other Logistics Activities
Logistics activities include transportation, stock management, warehouse management,
packaging, order processing, handling, customs clearance, customer services, information
management, demand forecasting, after-sales service, factory-warehouse location selection,
purchasing, and waste parts management. Transportation, stock management and warehouse
management are considered as the prominent basic logistics activities. These three activities are
the key activities carried out within the entire logistics channel (Nalçakan and Er, 2012) .
Since these logistics operations (packaging, order processing, handling, customs, etc.), other than
basic logistics activities, are generally carried out in closed areas, extreme weather events
primarily affect employee. Inadequate ventilation, heating and cooling systems of buildings will
negatively affect the workforce (Yavuz et al., 2020). Extreme temperatures may negatively affect
electrical infrastructure, digital systems and power supplies, and these interruptions may disrupt
379

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

business processes. Extreme weather events may hinder activities such as transportation, support
and personnel recruitment carried out before and after these operations.
Inventory control management has a strong impact on the performance and profitability of the
firm, increasing efficiency and reducing costs in the supply chain process (Khan and Siddiqui,
2019). Increasing extreme weather events may lead to increased transportation costs, which in
turn may lead to increased raw material acquisition costs. To fulfill production contracts and
maintain production, businesses may consume raw materials and intermediate products faster
than planned, ultimately reducing the inventory of unfinished products. Climate impact increases
the likelihood of road closures and traffic stops, reducing the speed at which finished products
reach customers, resulting in product backlogs and a significant increase in finished product
inventory (He et al., 2023).
Since customs revenues arise mainly from customs duties, taxes and duties applied to goods
subject to import and export, climate change may have various impacts on these revenues.
Disruptions caused by climate change, such as extreme weather events, prolonged droughts or
floods, can disrupt supply chains and business models, ultimately reducing trade volumes and
therefore customs revenues (Soro, 2023).
The number of climate elements that concern the company affects the positive financial
performance of companies. Businesses that are less dependent on the natural environment may
continue normal business operations and therefore experience positive sales growth, whereas
businesses that are highly dependent on weather conditions will, conversely, experience a decline
in sales (Bergmann et al., 2016).
Extreme weather events caused by climate change can cause disruptions to supply chain facilities,
changes in workforce productivity, variability in demand and declines in delivery performance.
These problems in supply chains multiply exponentially throughout the network, leading to
reduced efficiency, profits, delivery times and therefore order fulfillment. The fact that climate
change affects both the internal and external environment of the business in unexpected ways
causes problems in achieving planning and forecasting goals (Er Kara et al., 2021).
Packaging has a critical role in the storage, transportation and handling of products, and in
protecting and preserving the products (URL 39). However, unexpected sudden changes in
weather conditions can affect packaging materials and compromise their ability to keep the
products inside safe. Changing weather conditions such as extreme temperature and humidity
during transportation of the products will negatively affect products that spoil quickly due to
packaging that loses its function. Employees serving in this area will be negatively affected by
extreme weather events.
5. METHOD
In this study, literature review and expert interview technique, one of the qualitative research
methods, was used to reveal the effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains.
This study’s data came from secondary information made available by primary research in related
field. In recent years, secondary data has grown in significance for study in a variety of fields,
including sociology, economics, and political science (Trzesniewski et al., 2011). The researchers
380

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

answered crucial research concerns by analyzing secondary data in a way that broadened or
reinterpreted key findings in the area (Greenhoot and Dowsett, 2012).
Expert interviewing, as a qualitative research method that aims to explore or collect data on a
particular area of interest, has been a frequently used method in political and social research since
the early 1990s (Döringer, 2021). Interviews are the most commonly used data collection
method, and the semi-structured format is the most frequently used interview technique in
qualitative research (Kallio et al., 2016). According to Mergel et al.’s ( 2019) definition, an expert
is a person who possesses technical, procedural, and interpretive knowledge relevant to their
fields of expertise.
The advantages of using expert interviews, which have long been popular in social research, for
the researcher are as follows (Bogner et al., 2009);
 Talking to experts during the discovery process of a study is a more efficient and collective
method of collecting data than quantitative surveys.
 Interviewing experts can help shorten lengthy data collection processes, especially
because experts provide practical knowledge from within the organisation.
 Interviewing experts is appropriate when it is difficult or impossible to access a particular
social area
 Additionally, if the expert being interviewed also holds a key position in the organization,
opportunities to expand the researcher's access to the field may be uncovered during this
interview.
In qualitative research, the adequacy of sample size is relative; While a sample size of 10 is
sufficient for certain types of homogeneous or critical case sampling, it may be considered too
small to develop a complex phenomenon or theory (Sandelowski, 1995). There is no exact
number of samples that researchers should include in their studies. However, it is recommended
that researchers include at least 8 to 15 participants to obtain a large enough sample so that they
can determine whether their findings are representative of more than one person (Hill et al.,
1997).
10 experts were interviewed in the research. The interviewees who participated in the research
were coded as P1, P2, P3... with the letter ‘‘P’’ meaning ‘‘participant’’. Interviews were conducted
face to face and by telephone in February/March 2024. Interviewees were promised anonymity
in any publication and as a result only identifying them by their role in their organization.
In this study, it is aimed to answer the following research questions in particular:
RQ1: What is the impact of extreme weather events on logistics operations?
RQ2: How does climate change affect supply chains in general?
Although this research focuses on supply chains, it is expected to contribute to the literature on
its effects on international logistics activities.
6. RESULTS
In order to determine their perspectives on the effects of climate change on logistics and supply
chains, two questions were asked to the managers and employees of production, transportation
and warehouse companies; one question was asked to employees in the customs, packaging,
handling and delivery business and an occupational health and safety (OHS) expert in Turkey.
381

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

RQ1: What is the impact of extreme weather events on logistics operations ?
RQ2: How does climate change affect supply chains in general?
P1: (Mid-level manager in warehouse industry)
A1: ‘‘Especially heavy rains in recent years caused floods, causing minor damage to our warehouse.
We know that some of our friends in the industry have had more than one flood in their warehouses.
Even though there are no problems in our warehouse on extremely rainy days, the vehicles that bring
goods to and from the warehouse experience delays due to floods and puddles on the roads.
Furthermore, our friends we have talked to in the industry say that extreme heat, especially in the
summer months, has increased the energy costs of cold-storage warehouses.’’
A2: ‘‘As I mentioned, when excessive rainfall affects the transportation infrastructure, it becomes
difficult to reach ports or factories, it can disrupt the transportation of raw materials or inputs to
factories, logistics processes, and cause delays in supply chains. It causes businesses to change their
plans and sometimes even cause financial losses.’’
P2: (Mid-level manager in production)
A1: ‘‘We operate a factory that processes agricultural products. Farmers or brokers bring us the
grains. However, in some rural areas, we send trucks to farmers who want to send their grain to our
factory. The bridge that provides transportation to the village was damaged due to the flood and we
cannot bring the product. Or the farmer cannot take machinery to his field for harvesting.’’
A2: ‘‘Heavy rains during the grain harvest season not only reduce the quality of goods but also cause
producers' products to be flooded. Prices vary widely locally during periods of floods or heavy rain
during peak harvest season. There are grain silos in our factories. We know that silos in some places
have been damaged in strong storms in recent years. The industry now attaches importance to the
durability of buildings.’’
P3: (Mid-level manager in railway company)
A1: ‘‘In railway transportation, transportation cannot be carried out when floods damage the
ground on which the rails are laid. During periods of heavy rainfall, soil or rocks may fall on the rails
as a result of landslides. A similar event occurred was in 2024. In fact, although extreme heat does
not affect our entire line, it mostly affects the line in the southern regions. Heated rails expand and
can start to curve this is known as buckling, which can lead to accidents. In addition, since our
employees in some units work outdoors, there is a risk of health problems in extremely hot weather.’’
A2: ‘‘In general, considering Turkey's railway lines, alternative routes are used in case of road
interruption in any region. However, this alternative route can sometimes cover very long distances.
In this case, the sender of the goods has to bear serious costs. In addition to the cost, the time also
increases. The plans of the sender's recipient customer may be disrupted. If some of the loaded
wagons are damaged on the road, the production of the recipient company may be disrupted.’’
P4: (Mid-level manager in airline company)
A1: ‘‘Weather is an important data source for aviation. Uncertainty in weather forecasts or sudden
changes can make the weather's suitability for flight unpredictable. Such situations can make flight
planning and flight route selection difficult. Excessive rainfall may damage the apron or
infrastructure. I don't remember any large-scale incident in Turkey where the apron was affected by
floods, but we know that floods have occurred at airports in different countries in recent years.
Extreme temperatures can sometimes be a problem for employees working on the apron. Strong
storms can cause equipment on the apron to move and crash into aircraft. Since all these disruptions
382

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

ultimately concern the passenger, they affect your service quality and customer satisfaction.
Cancellations and delays can cause undesirable situations such as chaos at airports.’’
A2: ‘‘When we look at the characteristic features of air cargo transportation, these cargoes are
valuable, sensitive and must be transported quickly. In cases where airports cannot provide service
due to long-term extreme weather events, these cargoes will not reach their recipients on time.
Especially today, some inputs of companies that produce in just-in-time production model are
transported by air cargo. In this case, there will be a risk of the production line halting. Additionally,
race horses or Formula 1 racing vehicles are also transported by air. These organizations are of
worldwide importance. When we look at air transportation from the passenger perspective, business
travel has a significant share. Time is important for senior executives who hold business meetings in
different countries of the world. Delaying the flights of these executives may lead to business losses.’’
P5: ( Executive in road transport company)
A1: ‘‘On rainy days, intercity main roads do not cause much trouble, but district roads or bridge
crossings may flood. While passing through mountainous regions, rocks or soil from the mountain
block the road. In this case, we have to wait. If there is a facility nearby where we can park for a long
time, we wait there, but otherwise we have to stay in the truck on cold days, in which case we
experience fuel problems. If we get caught in snow or rain in the city, there is long traffic. When the
weather is very hot in the summer, asphalt melts and this negatively affects us drivers.’’
A2: ‘‘When it rains or snows a lot, if we are on the road, we are forced to reduce our speed. Of course,
this delays the delivery of cargo. We have had disputes regarding delay in freight delivery several
times. When the weather is too hot or too cold, the loads we carry can be affected. Of course, no one
wants their good to be damaged.’’
P6: (Mid-level manager in port operation)
A1: ‘‘By their nature, ports are located at flat areas and seaside. They are vulnerable to winds and
floods. Excessive rainfall can cause floods. Even if there is no puddle in the ports, it can affect traffic
on the roads accessing the ports. Extreme winds can blow empty containers in ports or knock down
cranes that load and unload containers, restraining operations. Similarly, there may be a risk of
containers falling from ships traveling at sea. In general, excessive rains and winds can stress
operations in ports.’’
A2: ‘‘These factors affecting maritime transportation can generally interrupt transportation and
port operations and cause delays. These negativities are reflected in transportation costs and
insurance expenses. The entire supply chain can be negatively affected in terms of both time and cost.
Interruption of port operations can cause delays. When the goods are delayed in reaching their
destination, the inputs of the manufacturing enterprises are delayed and production plans can be
disrupted.’’
Q: What is the impact of extreme weather events on logistics operations ?
P7: (Staffer in custom operation)
A: ‘‘During the summer season, extreme heat does not affect the operations and passage of
commercial vehicles and individual vehicles. If the vehicles have entered the customs area, border
crossing and customs procedures are carried out. However, there may be some difficulties for the
working staff. Some of our colleagues have experienced cases of sunstroke, but support personnel are
immediately assigned to replace the staff with health problems, services and operations continue
383

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

without interruption. Since customs areas are open and wide areas, they can be exposed to floods.
We have experienced floods and flooding in recent years, but since critical systems such as electricity
and digital infrastructure were not damaged, there was no disruption in customs procedures. Of
course, in the event of a flood that damages these systems, business processes will be interrupted.
Excessive snowfall at border gates and customs areas in high-altitude geographical regions causes
difficulties for employee in reaching their workplaces.’’
P8: (Assistant Professor in Occupational health and safety (OHS))
A: ‘‘Optimum temperature, humidity and wind conditions, which we call thermal comfort in indoor
environments, indicate the suitability of the workplace. For light work, the room temperature should
be 22-24C°. During heavy work, body temperature increases due to muscle movements producing
energy, so the room temperature should be low. Those who work in open areas may be exposed to
sunlight and skin disorders may occur in these people. To prevent this, it is necessary to have full
personal protective equipment such as mask, glasses and cream. Since the musculoskeletal system
will be more sensitive in extremely windy weather, employees working in these conditions are more
likely to experience health problems. Monitoring the health of employees by performing periodic
health checks in rainy weather and other adverse weather conditions is important for work
efficiency.’’
P9: (Staffer in delivery operation)
A: ‘‘Since we go to delivery with open vehicles, which we call motorcycles, extreme temperatures
affect us a lot. Likewise, in extremely windy and snowy weather, there are risks of both traffic
accidents and diseases. On days when delivery cannot be made, work piles up and drags it to the next
days as a workload. Recipient complain about delayed deliveries. During flood events and extremely
rainy days, urban traffic is heavy, which delays deliveries too, we have to change routes, and the extra
distance increases the fuel cost. When distribution/delivery businesses serving in industrial zones
delay deliveries on days when there is a lot of rain or snow, the lack of parts, tools and components
needed by industrial businesses disrupts production work. Additionally, since industrial zones are
located outside residential areas in some cities, deliveries are made on a certain day of the week. If
delivery cannot be made that day, it will be delayed until the next week, resulting in a serious loss of
time. Since the delivery/distribution sector generally works with insufficient personnel, there is a lot
of workload due to the lack of personnel with health problems, which causes an increase in the
workload of other personnel.’’
P10: (Staffer in packaging and handling operationin warehouse)
A: ‘‘Extreme weather events affect the personnel working in packaging, handling and other valueadded works and processes in the warehouses (indoor areas). On days when the weather is very hot,
if the ventilation or cooling systems of the buildings are inadequate, employees get tired more quickly
and their work performance decreases. If the weather is very cold, employees experience health
problems more often. Sweating and cold weather during busy working days cause illness. There are
similar effects for those who work outdoors. However, there are also health problems such as
sunstroke in outdoors. In regions where the winter season is intense, if warehouses or work sites are
outside the city, getting to work may be disrupted because snowfall closes the roads.’’
7. CONCLUSION
The global pandemic has wreaked unpredictable damage to supply chain networks, but beyond
shipping delays and parts shortages, climate change presents a longer-term challenge for supply
chains. Climate change affects a different part of supply chains, as different geographies
384

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

experience different extreme weather events due to their characteristic climate characteristics.
The business world is deeply interconnected due to international trade. The effects of climate
change, which is a systemic problem, will directly or indirectly affect every company. For different
companies, this will transform to different costs (URL 40).
This study, which was conducted to investigate the effects of climate change on logistics and
supply chains, achieved some important results. First of all, the research results show that
extreme weather events resulting from climate change affect operations, in the context of the
opinions of participants from different areas of logistics and supply chains. The majority of the
participants stated that extreme weather events affected their operations or also affected the
previous or post-stage of their operations (in transportation to the operation area or in the
transportation of departing vehicles to their next destination). The fact that the majority of
business processes in transportation operations are carried out in open areas shows that
infrastructure or facilities and especially employees, are vulnerable to extreme weather events.
An interruption occurring at one point in the supply chain will affect the entire chain throughout
the network, causing businesses to change their production and post-production plans, and will
also have a negative impact in terms of cost and time. Careful monitoring of the working
conditions of employees in packaging, handling and value-added operations in indoor areas
against extreme weather events will prevent possible health problems.
Different hazards arise as a result of climate change, which refers to long-term changes in local,
regional and global temperatures and weather patterns. The consequences of climate change,
such as temperature change, water stress, excessive precipitation, wildfire, sea level rise,
hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones, socio-economic vulnerability, have a variety of potential
impacts on different businesses in different parts of the world. The decrease in transportation
costs, the development of technology and the globalized production system have increased the
connections between producers and consumers all over the world and have made the smooth flow
of goods in the supply chains. However, since an interruption in one link of the supply chain will
affect the entire chain, it is important for businesses to be prepared for such interruptions in
advance. All factors of production are affected by climate change. The forced migration of millions
of people due to the sudden dangers caused by weather conditions such as floods, storms, forest
fires, and extreme temperatures and the loss of their lives due to these hazards will cause a loss
of labor required for production. Physical assets such as buildings that make up production
facilities and warehouses can be damaged or destroyed by hazards such as excessive
precipitation, floods and forest fires.
The transportation sector, which contributes to the welfare of societies and is an important sector
in the economic development of countries, is perhaps the area where climate change first showed
its impact. Sudden extreme weather events, floods and landslides disrupt transportation
infrastructures and cause interruptions in supply chains. Extreme temperatures damage the
railway lines by disrupting the ground on the highways and by causing the rails to buckle in the
railways. Similarly, heavy rainfall interrupts both modes of transport. The aviation industry is
affected by adverse conditions such as changes in storm patterns and sea level rise as a result of
the changing climate. Extreme weather events can cause disruption or interruption of airport
operations by damaging power and lighting infrastructure, navigation and communication
equipment in airport terminals. Ports are highly vulnerable to extreme weather conditions due to
their nature being built at sea level and serving in open areas. Damage to port infrastructures and
equipment will cause disruption of operations and halt global trade in ports where 80% of the
world's goods trade is handled. A model change has become imperative in the planning,
385

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains

investment and operation strategies of ports, which operate at the forefront of climate change, at
the center of global development, and which are the most important transit route of world trade.
The destruction caused by severe weather events in recent years has begun to seriously affect the
insurance industry. Large amounts of compensation payments by insurance companies caused
reinsurance companies to increase their premiums.
Whether the world warms more or less, societies will need to change the way they live and work.
With climate change exacerbating extreme weather events, world societies today have to renew
their world architecture and infrastructure for unexpected situations. Making buildings, cities,
supply chains, and even agriculture weatherproof is essential to having a chance to live with
climate change.
This study, which investigates the operational effects of climate change on logistics and supply
chains, is expected to be a stepping stone for further research and to provide a new perspective
in investigating the economic effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains
REFERENCES
Ademmer, M., Jannsen, N., & Mösle, S. (2020). Extreme weather events and economic activity: The case of low
water levels on the Rhine river. Kiel Working Paper.
Andreoni, V., Miola, A. (2015). Climate change and supply-chain vulnerability: Methodologies for resilience
and impacts quantification. International Journal of Emergency Services, 4(1), 6–26.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJES-09-2014-0012
Asariotis, R., Benamara, H. (2012). Maritime transport and the climate change challenge. Routledge.
Becker, A., Ng, A. K. Y., McEvoy, D., & Mullett, J. (2018). Implications of climate change for shipping: Ports
and supply chains. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 9(2), e508.
Bergmann, A., Stechemesser, K., & Guenther, E. (2016). Natural resource dependence theory: Impacts of
extreme weather events on organizations. Journal of Business Research, 69(4), 1361–1366
Bogner, A., Littig, B., & Menz, W. (2009). Introduction: Expert interviews—An introduction to a new
methodological debate. In Interviewing experts (pp. 1–13). Springer.
Breidenich, C., Magraw, D., Rowley, A., & Rubin, J. W. (1998). The Kyoto protocol to the United Nations
framework convention on climate change. American Journal of International Law, 92(2), 315–331.
Burbidge, R. (2018). Adapting aviation to a changing climate: Key priorities for action. Journal of Air
Transport Management, 71, 167–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2018.04.004
Carleton, T. A., & Hsiang, S. M. (2016). Social and economic impacts of climate. In Science (Vol. 353, Issue
6304). American Association for the Advancement of Science. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad9837
Chinowsky, P., Schweikert, A., Strzepek, N., Manahan, K., & Strzepek, K. (2011). Adaptation advantage to
climate change impacts on road infrastructure in Africa through 2100 (Issue 2011/25). WIDER Working
Paper.
Cœuré, B. (2018). Monetary policy and climate change. Speech at a Conference on" Scaling up Green Finance:
The Role of Central Banks", Organised by the Network for Greening the Financial System, the Deutsche
Bundesbank and the Council on Economic Policies, Berlin, 8.

386

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

Cui, Q., Xie, W., & Liu, Y. (2018). Effects of sea level rise on economic development and regional disparity in
China. Journal of Cleaner Production, 176, 1245–1253.
Çevik, V. A., & Durukan, T. (2020). Çin’in Kuzey Kutbu’na Olan İlgisi: Kutup İpek Yolu. Akdeniz İİBF Dergisi,
20(2), 254–262. https://doi.org/10.25294/auiibfd.827510
Çevik, V. A., & Durukan, T. (2021). Covid-19 Pandemisinin Küresel Ticarete İlk Etkileri. Kafkas Üniversitesi
İktisadi
ve
İdari
Bilimler
Fakültesi
Dergisi,
12(24),
1027–1055.
https://doi.org/10.36543/kauiibfd.2021.042
Dasaklis, T. K., & Pappis, C. P. (2013). Supply chain management in view of climate change: an overview of
possible impacts and the road ahead. Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management (JIEM), 6(4), 1139–
1161. http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jiem.883
Döringer, S. (2021). ‘The problem-centred expert interview’. Combining qualitative interviewing
approaches for investigating implicit expert knowledge. International Journal of Social Research
Methodology, 24(3), 265–278.
Er Kara, M., Ghadge, A., & Bititci, U. S. (2021). Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain
performance. International Journal of Production Research, 59(24), 7317–7335.
Eurocontrol. (2013). Challenges of growth 2013. Eurocontrol Brussels.
Eurocontrol. (2018). European Aviation in 2040—Challenges of Growth. Eurocontrol Brussels, Belgium.
Forzieri, G., Bianchi, A., e Silva, F. B., Herrera, M. A. M., Leblois, A., Lavalle, C., Aerts, J. C. J. H., & Feyen, L.
(2018). Escalating impacts of climate extremes on critical infrastructures in Europe. Global Environmental
Change, 48, 97–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.11.007
Gabela, J. G. F., & Sarmiento, L. (2020). The effects of the 2013 floods on Germany’s freight traffic.
Transportation
Research
Part
D:
Transport
and
Environment,
82,
102274.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2020.102274
Garmabaki, A. H. S., Thaduri, A., Famurewa, S., & Kumar, U. (2021). Adapting railway maintenance to climate
change. Sustainability, 13(24), 13856.
Ghadge, A., Wurtmann, H., & Seuring, S. (2020). Managing climate change risks in global supply chains: a
review and research agenda. International Journal of Production Research, 58(1), 44–64.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1629670
Godde, C. M., Mason-D’Croz, D., Mayberry, D. E., Thornton, P. K., & Herrero, M. (2021). Impacts of climate
change on the livestock food supply chain; a review of the evidence. Global Food Security, 28, 100488.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2020.100488
Gopinath, G. (2020). The great lockdown: Worst economic downturn since the great depression. IMF Blog,
14, 2020.
Greenhoot, A. F., & Dowsett, C. J. (2012). Secondary data analysis: An important tool for addressing
developmental questions. Journal of Cognition and Development, 13(1), 2–18.
He, X., Xu, X., & Shen, Y. (2023). How climate change affects enterprise inventory management-From the
perspective of regional traffic. Journal of Business Research, 162, 113864.
Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Williams, E. N. (1997). A guide to conducting consensual qualitative research.
The Counseling Psychologist, 25(4), 517–572.

387

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains
Izaguirre, C., Losada, I. J., Camus, P., Vigh, J. L., & Stenek, V. (2021). Climate change risk to global port
operations. Nature Climate Change, 11(1), 14–20.
Kallio, H., Pietilä, A., Johnson, M., & Kangasniemi, M. (2016). Systematic methodological review: developing
a framework for a qualitative semi‐structured interview guide. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 72(12), 2954–
2965.
Karagül, M. (2014). Kalkınma sürecinde üretim faktörlerinin yeniden tanımlanması. Leges Ekonomik ve
Hukuk Araştırmaları Dergisi, 1(1), 1–11.
Khan, F., & Siddiqui, D. A. (2019). Impact of Inventory Management on firm’s efficiency–a quantitative
research study on departmental stores operating in Karachi. Social Science and Humanities Journal, 3(4),
964–980.
Koks, E., Pant, R., Thacker, S., & Hall, J. W. (2019). Understanding business disruption and economic losses
due to electricity failures and flooding. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 10(4), 421–438.
Lambert, D., Stock, J. R., & Ellram, L. M. (1998). Fundamentals of logistics management. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Larson, P. D., & Rogers, D. S. (1998). Supply chain management: definition, growth and approaches. Journal
of Marketing Theory and Practice, 6(4), 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/10696679.1998.11501805
Leitold, R., Garschagen, M., Tran, V., & Diez, J. R. (2021). Flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation
of manufacturing firms: Global knowledge gaps and lessons from Ho Chi Minh City. International Journal of
Disaster Risk Reduction, 61, 102351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102351
Markolf, S. A., Hoehne, C., Fraser, A., Chester, M. V, & Underwood, B. S. (2019). Transportation resilience to
climate change and extreme weather events–Beyond risk and robustness. Transport Policy, 74, 174–186.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2018.11.003
Martin Associates. (2022). Martin Associates Research: The Economic Impacts of West Coast Ports.
Mazzacurati, E., Vargas Mallard, D., Turner, J., Steinberg, N., & Shaw, C. (2017). Measuring Physical Climate
Risk in Equity Portfolios. Deutsche Asset Management Global Research Group: Frankfurt, Germany.
Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., & Haug, N. (2019). Defining digital transformation: Results from expert interviews.
Government Information Quarterly, 36(4), 101385.
Mimura, N. (2013). Sea-level rise caused by climate change and its implications for society. Proceedings of
the Japan Academy, Series B, 89(7), 281–301. https://doi.org/10.2183/pjab.89.281
Nalçakan, M., & Er, F. (2012). Lojistik İlkeleri. Eskişehir: TC Anadolu Üniversitesi Yayını, 2517.
Nemry, F., & Demirel, H. (2012). Impacts of Climate Change on Transport: A focus on road and rail transport
infrastructures. European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Institute for Prospective Technological
Studies (IPTS).
Pankratz, N., & Schiller, C. (2021). Climate change and adaptation in global supply-chain networks.
Proceedings of Paris December 2019 Finance Meeting EUROFIDAI-ESSEC, European Corporate Governance
Institute–Finance Working Paper, 775.
Parajuli, R., Thoma, G., & Matlock, M. D. (2019). Environmental sustainability of fruit and vegetable
production supply chains in the face of climate change: A review. Science of the Total Environment, 650,
2863–2879.

388

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

Rail Safety and Standards Board. (2003). Railway Safety Implications of Weather, Climate and Climate
Change.
Ryley, T., Baumeister, S., & Coulter, L. (2020). Climate change influences on aviation: A literature review.
Transport Policy, 92, 55–64.
Smythe, T. C. (2013). Assessing the impacts of Hurricane Sandy on the Port of New York and New Jersey’s
Maritime responders and response infrastructure. Natural Hazards Center.
Sandelowski, M. (1995). Sample size in qualitative research. Research in Nursing & Health, 18(2), 179–183.
Solaymani, S. (2019). CO2 emissions patterns in 7 top carbon emitter economies: the case of transport
sector. Energy, 168, 989–1001. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.11.145
Soro, S. J. (2023). The Impact of Climate Change on Customs Revenues in The Waemu Zone. Jurnal BPPK:
Badan Pendidikan Dan Pelatihan Keuangan, 16(2), 113–120.
Stern, N. (2015). Why are we waiting?: The logic, urgency, and promise of tackling climate change. Mit Press.
Stern, V., Peters, S., & Bakhshi, V. (2010). The stern review. Government Equalities Office, Home Office.
Swiss Re. (2020). Natural catastrophes in 2020: Secondary perils in the spotlight, but don’t forget primaryperil risks. Sigma, 1, 2021.
Tanglis, M., & Devine, S. (2018). Extreme heat and unprotected workers: Public Citizen petitions OSHA to
protect the millions of workers who labor in dangerous temperatures. Washington, DC: Public Citizen.
Tol, R. S. J. (2009). The economic effects of climate change. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(2), 29–51.
DOI: 10.1257/jep.23.2.29
Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., & Lucas, R. E. (2011). Secondary data analysis: An introduction for
psychologists. JSTOR.
Yavuz, Ş., Gür, B., & Yavuz, A. (2020). İmalat işlerinde çalışanlarda iş sağlığı ve güvenliği algı düzeyinin
incelenmesi. Journal of Social and Humanities Sciences Research, 7(59), 2618–2627.
URL 1, https://covid19.who.int/ Accessed June 25, 2022,
URL 2, https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2021/09/24/the-climate-has-overtaken-covid-19-asgerman-voters-top-concern Accessed June 25, 2022
URL 3, https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/2021-tied-for-6th-warmest-year-in-continued-trend-nasaanalysis-shows Accessed June 25, 2022
URL 4, https://www.ft.com/content/b08807de-cae0-11e8-9fe5-24ad351828ab Accessed June 25, 2022
URL 5, https://climate.nasa.gov/resources/global-warming-vs-climate-change/ Accessed . June 26, 2022
URL 6, https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/what-is-climate-change Accessed June 26, 2022
URL 7, https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/tdstat45_en.pdf Accessed February 12,
2021
URL 8, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2020/09/17/the-great-disrupter Accessed February
12, 2021

389

Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains
URL 9, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-3/ Accessed July 3, 2022
URL 10, https://cscmp.org/CSCMP/Educate/SCM_Definitions_and_Glossary_of_Terms.aspx Accessed June
26, 2022
URL 11, https://www.economist.com/leaders/2019/02/21/climate-change-and-the-threat-to-companies
Accessed August 22, 2022
URL 12, https://www.mckinsey.com.br/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/confrontingclimate-risk Accessed August 22, 2022
URL 13, https://www.ft.com/content/bef4699a-1ce7-47e8-b696-40bdc1eb1449 Accessed June 28, 2022
URL 14, https://www.ft.com/content/8b118e44-a256-4aae-aaa0-464009276e56 Accessed June 28, 2022
URL
15,
https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2020-01/global-advisorclimate-change-consumer-behavior.pdf Accessed June 28, 2022
URL 16, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2016/01/13/climate-change-is-a-threat---andan-opportunity---for-the-private-sector Accessed June 27, 2022
URL 17, https://www.unhcr.org/news/latest/2016/11/581f52dc4/frequently-asked-questions-climatechange-disaster-displacement.html Accessed June 28, 2022
URL 18, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/climate-risk-andresponse-physical-hazards-and-socioeconomic-impacts Accessed June 28, 2022
URL
19,
https://www.reuters.com/article/thailand-floods-supplychain-idUSL3E7LH0GK20111017
Accessed June 28, 2022
URL 20, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-ii/ Accessed June 28, 2022
URL
21,
https://globalcanopy.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/Why-net-zero-needs-zerodeforestation-now-June-2022.pdf Accessed July 3, 2022
URL 22, https://www.ft.com/content/d0224863-6071-436d-a628-d7f3a71cb36f Accessed August 24,
2022
URL 23, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2020/09/17/a-grim-outlook Accessed June 28,
2022,
URL 24, https://www.ft.com/content/ec2f93ad-d23c-4ff4-867a-59385d1cc8a6 Accessed August 20, 2022
URL 25, https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Ocean-fact-sheetpackage.pdf Accessed July 1, 2022
URL 26, http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2020/indexeh.htm Accessed July 1, 2022
URL
27,
https://edo.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/news/GDO-EDODroughtNews202208_Europe.pdf
Accessed August 24, 2022
URL 28, https://readyforclimate.org/reports/water-crisis-in-china/ Accessed August 24, 2022
URL 29, https://www.ft.com/content/7c2052b9-eaac-4f3e-9386-dfa3ae100206 Accessed August 21, 2022

390

Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391)

Veli Ahmet Çevik

URL 30, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/chinas-growing-water-crisis Accessed August 24, 2022
URL 31, https://www.ft.com/content/8f5c8360-19eb-437a-b55c-4c393ffa0ba5 Accessed July 4, 2022
URL 32, https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/cimem7d23_en.pdf; Accessed July 6, 2022
URL 33, https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-03-29/add-german-rain-and-rhine-waterlevels-to-investors-checklist-of-worries Accessed August 20, 2022,
URL 34, https://www.ft.com/content/d6317b92-9c13-4f80-b5c8-de966adb6fcf Accessed August 20, 2022
URL
35,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-warming-arctic-emerges-as-a-route-for-subsea-cables11655323903 Accessed July 7, 2022
URL 36, https://www.eea.europa.eu/ims/economic-losses-from-climate-related Accessed August 21,
2022,
URL 37, https://www.swissre.com/press-release/Floods-and-storms-drive-global-insured-catastrophelosses-of-USD-38-billion-in-first-half-of-2022-Swiss-Re-Institute-estimates/4d31d695-e49f-4168-85bc2a5944313b05 Accessed August 21, 2022
URL 38, https://www.ft.com/content/cac643b3-dd22-4e85-befb-e1b8b153445b Accessed August 21,
2022
URL
39,
https://www.toptier.com/en-us/blog-events/blog/how-temperature-changes-can-affectpackaging Accessed February 27, 2024
URL 40, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2020/09/17/directing-the-disruption Accessed June
28, 2022
Vajjarapu, H., Verma, A., & Gulzar, S. (2019). Adaptation policy framework for climate change impacts on
transportation sector in developing countries. Transportation in Developing Economies, 5(1), 1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40890-019-0071-y
Wan, Z., El Makhloufi, A., Chen, Y., & Tang, J. (2018). Decarbonizing the international shipping industry:
Solutions
and
policy
recommendations.
Marine
Pollution
Bulletin,
126,
428–435.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.11.064
Williams, P. D. (2016). Transatlantic flight times and climate change. Environmental Research Letters, 11(2),
24008. DOI 10.1088/1748-9326/11/2/024008
Yesudian, A. N., & Dawson, R. J. (2021). Global analysis of sea level rise risk to airports. Climate Risk
Management, 31, 100266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2020.100266
Zhang, L., Long, R., Chen, H., & Yang, T. (2018). Analysis of an optimal public transport structure under a
carbon emission constraint: a case study in Shanghai, China. Environmental Science and Pollution Research,
25(4), 3348–3359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-0660-4
Zhou, Q., Hanasaki, N., & Fujimori, S. (2018). Economic consequences of cooling water insufficiency in the
thermal
power
sector
under
climate
change
scenarios.
Energies,
11(10),
2686.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en11102686

391

View publication stats

