Finance and Economics Discussion Series
Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
ISSN 1936-2854 (Print)
ISSN 2767-3898 (Online)

Climate Change and Adaptation in Global Supply-Chain
Networks

Nora M.C. Pankratz and Christoph M. Schiller
2022-056

Please cite this paper as:
Pankratz, Nora M.C., and Christoph M. Schiller (2022).
“Climate Change and
Adaptation in Global Supply-Chain Networks,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-056.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2022.056.

NOTE: Staff working papers in the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) are preliminary
materials circulated to stimulate discussion and critical comment. The analysis and conclusions set forth
are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staff or the
Board of Governors. References in publications to the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (other than
acknowledgement) should be cleared with the author(s) to protect the tentative character of these papers.

Climate Change and Adaptation in
Global Supply-Chain Networks
Nora M.C. Pankratz∗

Christoph M. Schiller†

August 16, 2022

Abstract
This paper examines how physical climate risks affect firms’ financial performance and operational
risk management in global supply-chains. We document that weather shocks at supplier locations
reduce the operating performance of suppliers and their customers. Further, customers respond
to perceived changes in suppliers’ climate-risk exposure: When realized shocks exceed ex-ante
expectations, customers are 6-11% more likely to terminate existing supplier-relationships.
Consistent with models of experience-based learning, this effect increases with signal strength
and repetition, is insensitive to long-term climate projections, and increases with industry
competitiveness and decreases with supply-chain integration. Customers subsequently choose
replacement suppliers with lower expected climate-risk exposure.
Keywords: Climate Change, Adaptation, Firm Performance, Production Networks.
JEL Codes: G15, Q54, G30, F64

We thank Alan Barreca, Jaap Bos, Claudia Custodio (discussant), Hasan Fallahgoul (discussant), Caroline
Flammer, Martin Götz, Adel Guitouni (discussant), John Hassler (discussant), Alexander Hillert, Marcin Kacperczyk,
Taehyun Kim (discussant), Thomas Mosk, Jisung Park, Sébastien Pouget, Julien Sauvagnat (discussant), and Sumudu
Watugala (discussant) for many valuable suggestions. We also thank the participants at the 2020 AEA Annual Meeting,
EFA Meeting, SHOF-ECGI Conference on Finance and Sustainability, 2019 LBS Summer Finance Symposium, the
IWFSAS, GRASFI, EDHEC Finance of Climate Change, and the Paris December Finance Meeting and seminars at
the UC Environmental Economics Working Group, Boston University, Deutsche Bundesbank, European Central Bank,
Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, Imperial
College, Ivey Business School, Queen’s University, Stockholm School of Economics, University of Zurich, UCLA,
Arizona State University, the University of San Francisco, Maastricht University, and Goethe Universität Frankfurt
for many helpful comments. Nora Pankratz thanks the French Social Investment Forum (FIR) and the Principles for
Responsible Investment (PRI) for a dissertation award received in 2020, and Christoph Schiller thanks the Canadian
Securities Institute (CSI) for financial support in 2018. Nora Pankratz worked on this project prior to employment at
the Federal Reserve Board, while a Ph.D. candidate at Maastricht University (UM) and as a Postdoctoral Researcher
at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Christoph Schiller worked on this project prior to employment
at Arizona State University, while a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Toronto (UofT). Data sources were obtained
under purview of UM, UCLA, and UofT. All remaining errors are our own.
∗
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. All views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve System. Email: nora.m.pankratz@frb.gov.
†
Arizona State University (ASU), W.P. Carey School of Business. Email: christoph.schiller@asu.edu.

Data Acknowledgements
This study contains modified Copernicus Climate Change Service Information [2020]. Neither the European
Commission nor ECMWF is responsible for any use that may be made of the Copernicus Information or
data it contains. Further, we acknowledge the World Climate Research Programme’s Working Group on
Coupled Modelling, which is responsible for CMIP, and we thank the climate modeling group at the Max
Planck Institute for Meteorology for producing and making available their model output. For CMIP the U.S.
Department of Energy’s Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison provides coordinating
support and led development of software infrastructure in partnership with the Global Organization for Earth
System Science Portals. Moreover, we are thankful to the Darthmouth Flood Observatory (DFO) as well as
the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) for providing data from the Emergency
Events Database (EM-DAT).

1

Introduction

Businesses face increasing pressure to address their operational exposure to physical climate risks.
While managers and investors are looking for ways to alleviate climate change risks by adapting
their operations (Lin, Schmid, and Weisbach, 2020) and investments (Krueger, Sautner, and Starks,
2020; Ilhan, Krueger, Sautner, and Starks, 2020), academic research has primarily studied how
transitory weather shocks affect firms’ earnings (Addoum, Ng, and Ortiz-Bobea, 2020), stock returns
(Kumar, Xin, and Zhang, 2019), and labor and capital productivity (Graff-Zivin, Hsiang, and Neidell,
2018; Zhang et al., 2018), among others. Much less is known about how firms adapt to climate
change, despite the fact that firms’ endogenous responses to physical climate risks are crucial to
understanding the long-run effects of climate change on financial market outcomes.
Operational risk management in response to climate change is particularly important for firms
engaged in extensive international production networks. In a globalized economy, supply-chains
often move through parts of the world that are most vulnerable to the impact of climate change. As
a result, firms might be indirectly exposed to physical risks due to their suppliers. Reflecting these
concerns, over 50% of CEOs mentioned risks posed to their global supply chains by climate change
as one of their primary concerns in a recent survey (PWC, 2015).
However, adapting to climate change is a complex task for economic agents in general and
firms in supply-chain organizations in particular. Climate change is characterized by unknowable
uncertainty – particularly in the short- and medium-run – as weather realizations provide a noisy
signal of potential changes in the underlying distribution (Deryugina, 2013; Kala, 2019). Further,
indirect exposure to physical climate risks due to suppliers and customers can be challenging to
identify. In this environment, it is unclear how weather shocks affect firms’ expectations of climate
risks and, as a consequence, the adjustment of their supply-chain networks.
In this paper, we study whether firms adjust their supply-chain networks in response to perceived
changes in their suppliers’ exposure to physical climate risks. First, we establish that the financial
consequences of weather shocks propagate from suppliers to their corporate customers around the
world. Next, we investigate if and how firms adapt their supply-chain organizations in response to
changes in supplier exposure. In particular, we examine how discrepancies between realized and
expected weather shocks affect the continuation of existing and the initiation of new supply-chain

1

relationships. Our main contribution is to show that customers are more likely to terminate suppliers
when climate-related shocks increase beyond historical expectations, and switch to replacements in
less exposed climate zones. Our study provides novel evidence on how changes in perceived climate
risk affect firms’ operational risk management and the formation of global supply-chains.
We combine detailed firm-level supply-chain data from FactSet Revere with financial performance
data from Worldscope, geographic location and establishment-level data from FactSet Fundamentals
and Orbis, data on local temperatures from the European Center for Medium-term Weather
Forecasts, floods from the Darthmouth Flood Observatory, and temperature projections computed
in the framework of the fifth phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5). Our
supply-chain dataset includes 5,628 (8,200) unique supplier (customer) firms, comprising over 500,000
quarterly supplier-customer observations across 92 (74) countries around the world, over the period
from 2003 to 2016.
We focus on two types of weather shocks – heat and floods – for the following reasons. First, the
literature in physiology and economics has documented several channels through which temperatures
affect firm productivity. For example, heat reduces worker performance (Graff-Zivin et al., 2018),
labor supply (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014), and firm-level output (Zhang et al., 2018), with sharp
declines at temperatures over 30◦ C. These risks are expected to increase, as the number of heat
days (i.e. days that exceed 100◦ F) is projected to rise from currently 1% of days to more than
15% of days by 2099 without substantial efforts to reduce emissions (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014).
Second, flooding incidents can cause enormous economic damage. According to FEMA, the U.S.
suffered more than $260 billion in flood-related damages between 1980 and 2013. Both inland and
coastal floods are expected to become more frequent and severe due to climate change (CSSR, 2017).
Third, extreme heat and floods differ in their duration and impact on physical and human capital,
allowing us to study differences in firms’ adaption across different types of physical climate risks.
We begin by examining if firms face financial incentives to adapt their supply-chain organizations
due to the heat and flood exposure of their suppliers. Whereas Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) and
Carvalho, Nirei, Saito, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2021) show that the effect of large-scale natural disasters
can propagate through production networks, it is unclear if other weather shocks – which are
projected to change heterogeneously around the world but are too small to be classified as disasters

2

– cause similar distortions.1 Heat and floods might reduce supplier productivity or impose additional
costs for suppliers, for example by increasing air conditioning or clean-up costs. This can affect
customer profits, especially if frictions such as relationship-specific investments prevent customer
firms from making operational adjustments in the short-run. However, customers’ operational risk
management strategies could insulate them against disruptions, and suppliers may not be able to
pass on increased costs downstream.
Following the literature (e.g. Dell, Jones, and Olken, 2014; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015a;
Carleton and Hsiang, 2016; Auffhammer, 2018), we construct location-specific measures of heat
and flood exposure for our sample of suppliers based on daily temperatures and inundation records
over a given quarter in the location of firms’ production facilities. Consistent with Somanathan
et al. (2015), Zhang et al. (2018), and Pankratz et al. (2019), we find a significant negative effect
of high temperatures and floods on supplier operating performance.2 This effect is stronger for
geographically concentrated suppliers, and firms in industries which have been shown to be vulnerable
to climate risks such as agriculture, mining, and construction (Addoum et al., 2019).
Next, we document that weather shocks to suppliers negatively affect the performance of their
customers. Following the occurrence of prolonged periods of heat in a given firm-quarter at supplier
locations, customer revenues (operating income) over assets decrease by 0.3% (0.9%) relative to
the sample mean. When suppliers are affected by a local flooding incident, customer revenue and
operating income are reduced by 1.6% and 6%, respectively, with a lag of up to four quarters.3
Further, we find that a customer’s ability to source inputs from alternative sources mitigates the
propagation of supplier disruptions.
Our main analysis focuses on the question of whether and how firms learn about climate change
and adapt their supply-chains when global climate risk exposure changes. Given that short- and
medium-term weather realizations provide noisy signals for the underlying distribution, detecting
changes in climate risk is challenging. Prior research in finance and economics has proposed
experience-based Bayesian updating to model learning in general (Alevy, Haigh, and List, 2007;
Previous research has found mixed results on the effects of extreme temperatures on firm productivity. While
Addoum et al. (2020) find no statistically significant link between temperatures and establishment-level sales, other
studies document heterogeneous but largely adverse effects of heat on firm productivity and financial performance
(Somanathan, Somanathan, Sudarshan, and Tewari, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Pankratz, Bauer, and Derwall, 2019;
Addoum, Ng, and Ortiz-Bobea, 2019; Custodio, Ferreira, Garcia-Appendini, and Lam, 2020).
2
We conduct a series of robustness tests using various absolute and relative measures of heat exposure.
3
We do not find evidence that such decreases are compensated in later financial quarters.
1

3

Chiang, Hirshleifer, Qian, and Sherman, 2011), and about climate change in particular (Kelly,
Kolstad, and Mitchell, 2005; Deryugina, 2013; Moore, 2017; Kala, 2019; Choi, Gao, and Jiang,
2020). We follow this literature and conjecture that when entering a supplier relationship, customers
trade off perceived costs and benefits such as climate risks, product quality, and input prices of
prospective suppliers based on observable characteristics. Under basic assumptions about production
and input markets, prices and quantities of inputs and the matches of customers to suppliers are
determined in equilibrium, and reflect the underlying probabilities of heat and flooding events. In
this setting, adverse weather shocks in line with the expected distribution would not affect the
longevity of supply chain relations. However, if firms perceive that the underlying distribution of
weather shocks may have changed, the original supplier choice may no longer be optimal. Hence,
existing supplier-relations may be terminated more frequently when climate-related shocks observed
over the course of a supply-chain relationship exceed ex-ante anticipated risks.
To test this idea, we construct a measure of realized vs. expected climate risk by comparing heat
and flood days before and during any given supply-chain relationship. We document a large, positive
effect of climate risk exceedance on supplier termination. Our results show that a supply-chain link
is 6.1-7.8 (7.9-11.1) percent more likely to be terminated in a given year, if the realized exposure to
heat (floods) exceeds proxies of customers’ ex-ante expectations. This result is robust to alternative
benchmark periods, and holds controlling for industry and country-by-time fixed effects for suppliers
and customers. Further, the effect is stronger for suppliers in competitive industries and weaker for
closely integrated supply-chains. We find similar results implementing our tests as linear probability
models, logistic regressions, and as Cox proportional hazard models.
In line with with models of experience-based learning (Deryugina, 2013), our results show that the
likelihood of supplier termination is increasing in signal strength and repetition, i.e. the magnitude
and number of times realized weather shocks exceeded prior expectations. Moreover, consistent
with customer learning and inconsistent with explanations related to supply-side terminations, we
find an economically small effect of transitory shocks on supply-chain terminations. In addition, our
results are unaffected by excluding delisted suppliers.
While our main tests reflect the idea that firms form priors and update their beliefs based on
observable shocks, we also consider the role of long-term climate projections. Using model output
from the CMIP5 project, we obtain projections for the average number of heat days between 2040
4

and 2059.4 We then estimate our main tests for subsamples of suppliers for which long-term climate
models project minimal changes under various emission trajectories. We find that customers strongly
respond to short-run increases in weather shocks beyond ex-ante expectations even when long-run
projections indicate little to no change, which may emphasize the challenges of learning about
climate change based on perceived changes in the distribution of weather shocks.
Last, we examine if firms consider suppliers’ potential exposure when switching to new suppliers.
For this purpose, we identify ‘replacement’ suppliers as firms with identical 4-digit SIC codes as the
terminated suppliers which entered a new supplier-relationship with the same customer within one
year. We estimate linear probability models to test if replacement suppliers have a lower exposure to
heat and floods than terminated suppliers conditional on realized vs. expected weather shocks during
the terminated supplier relationship. For heat, we find a positive effect of climate-risk exceedance on
the likelihood that customers choose a replacement supplier with lower ex-post exposure observed
both during as well as after the initial relationship. An unexpectedly high number of shocks during
the initial relationship increases the probability that the customer chooses a less exposed replacement
supplier by 6 to 10 percentage points, controlling for industry- and country-specific time fixed effects
of both suppliers and customers. We find a smaller, less precisely estimated effect for floods and
when considering climate risk based on long-term projections.
Our paper contributes to the literature on climate change, finance, and economics along several
dimensions. First, our paper provides novel evidence on the implications of climate change for
firms and investors. Previous research in finance has studied the direct effects of weather shocks on
firm profitability (Zhang et al., 2018; Addoum et al., 2020; Pankratz et al., 2019), housing prices
(Baldauf, Garlappi, and Yannelis, 2020), stock returns (Kumar et al., 2019), financial markets (Hong,
Li, and Xu, 2019; Schlenker and Taylor, 2019), and capital structure (Ginglinger and Moreau, 2019).
We add to this literature by showing that firms can be indirectly exposed to physical climate risks
due to their global supplier network. This aspect of our findings is most closely related to Barrot
and Sauvagnat (2016), Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019), and Carvalho et al. (2021), who
document the propagation of natural disasters along firm linkages. In contrast to these studies, we
focus on weather events that are less severe than natural disasters but closely tied to long-term
We access projections through the ECMWF. They are part of the CMIP5 project, which is the primary source of
climate data for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Reports.
4

5

climate change, allowing us to explicitly examine long-run projections and changes in the underlying
distribution of events.
Second, our paper is among the first in the finance and environmental economics literature to
study how firms learn about and adapt to climate change. In recent work, Lin et al. (2020) show
that electricity providers increase investments in flexible power plants in response to long-term
changes in local climate, Li, Lin, Jin, and Zhang (2020) document a negative effect of changes in
long-term climate conditions on local employment, and Li, Shan, Tang, and Yao (2020) find that
firms with high climate uncertainty increase their capital investments. Our paper is part of this
emerging literature by studying firms’ endogenous responses to indirect climate risk exposure in a
unique empirical setting, using a framework of experience-based learning about climate change.
Third, we contribute to the literature on learning about climate change. Choi et al. (2020) find
that market participants revise their beliefs about climate change when experiencing unusual weather
using Google search data. Deryugina (2013) uses survey data on beliefs about global warming to
show that local temperature fluctuations affect these beliefs in a Bayesian framework. Moore (2017)
and Kala (2019) develop and test theoretical models on experience-based learning about climate
change. Our work builds on these theoretical frameworks but explores learning and adaptation
outside of the agricultural sector, combining both observed signals and climate projections.
Our main finding on the adaptation of supply chains to physical risks has potentially important
implications, as the areas of the world which are disproportionately affected by the impact of
climate change are already less developed today (Burke et al., 2015b; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016).
Hence, our findings also speak to the growing literature on endogenous production networks and
macroeconomic growth and productivity (e.g. Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot, 2017; Lim, 2018; Oberfield,
2018; Acemoglu and Azar, 2020).

2

Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics

We combine data on global supply-chains, firm financial performance, and local climate exposure
from four main sources. In the following sections we describe these sources, explain how we link the
individual datasets, and provide summary statistics for our main sample. Throughout the paper,
we provide relevant summary statistics and details in the context of the respective empirical tests.
6

2.1

Global Supply Chains

We obtain data on customer-supplier relationships from FactSet Revere. Previous related research
(e.g. Hertzel, Li, Officer, and Rodgers, 2008; Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Banerjee, Dasgupta, and
Kim, 2008; Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016) has primarily relied on SEC regulation S-K, which requires
U.S. firms to disclose customers which account for at least 10% of their total sales. In contrast, the
Revere data includes both U.S. and foreign firms and does not require sales volumes to exceed 10%.
This is important, because many of the regions most vulnerable to climate change are located outside
of the United States. Further, the research relying on SEC regulation has been unable to study the
termination of supplier-customer relationships, since the appearance and disappearance of links due
to actual starts and ends of relationships cannot be distinguished from changes in the relative sales
volumes around the reporting threshold. The Revere supply-chain data is hand-collected, verified,
and updated by FactSet analysts relying on a range of primary sources of information, including
companies’ annual reports and SEC filings, investor presentations, company websites and press
releases, supply contracts, and purchase obligations.
Nonetheless, the data captures only a subsample of global supply-chain relationships. First, we
require financial and accounting data for our sample firms, limiting the sample to listed firms. Smaller,
private firms may be more strongly affected by weather shocks if such firms are geographically more
concentrated and more financially constrained. Therefore, we might observe a lower bound of the
effect of heat and flooding on firms in our analysis. Second, the heterogeneity in the availability of
financial data around the world is likely to bias the sample towards firms in developed markets. In
total, we obtain a sample of 8,200 (5,769) unique customer (supplier) firms from 74 (92) countries,
comprising almost 595,000 supplier-customer pair-year-quarter observations over the sample period
from 2003 to 2017. As Figures 1a and 1b show, most suppliers are located in Asia (40.3%), North
Americas (38.8%), and Europe (17.4%). Previous studies have shown stronger effects of weather
shocks on economic output in less developed economies (Burke et al., 2015b). Hence, our findings
may underestimate the effects of disruptions in less developed markets. Table 1 documents the
industry composition of our sample. Most of the suppliers and customers in our sample operate in
manufacturing (SIC 1st digits 2 and 3) or transport and utilities (SIC 1st digit 4). Tables 2a and
2b report summary statistics at the supplier and customer level. Table 2c presents relationship-level

7

summary statistics for the firm-pairs in our sample. In line with prior research (e.g. Banerjee
et al., 2008), we document an asymmetric mutual importance between customers and their suppliers
in our sample. First, sample customer firms are much larger than their suppliers. The median
customer holds 19 times the assets of the median supplier firm (book value of assets). Second, for
firm-pairs where detailed sales data from the supplier to the customer is available (less than 10% of
the sample), the customers on average represent 18.6% of the suppliers’ total sales, but sales from
the suppliers only account for 2.06% of the customers’ cost of goods sold.

2.2

Accounting Performance and Firm Characteristics

Next, we obtain quarterly financial performance data from 2000 to 2016 from Worldscope. Our main
variables of interest for measuring operating firm performance in Section 3.1 are quarterly revenues
and operating income, scaled by one-year lagged total assets. In addition, we obtain information
on firms’ financial reporting schedules to ensure that we correctly match climate and performance
records when financial quarters deviate from calendar quarters.
We additionally collect data on asset tangibility, defined as the ratio of property, plants, and
equipment (PPE) to total assets, operating margin, inventory, accounts receivables, and cost of
goods sold (COGS), and delisting dates from Worldscope and Datastream. Further, we construct
measures of industry competitiveness as the number of firms in a given SIC 2-digit code industry
in the universe of Compustat Global firms. From the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
we obtain input-output matrices for 2012 and use this data to construct “industry-level input
concentration” as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of dollar values across all input industries for
each customer industry. To ensure that international financial records are comparable, we convert
all variables into U.S. dollars. To remove outliers, we winsorize all variables above (below) the 99th
(1st) percentile. We further drop firms with incomplete records of financial information and exclude
firms in the financial industry (SIC code between 6000 and 6999).

2.3

Firm Locations

We obtain information on the location of firms’ operations from two different sources, FactSet
Fundamentals and Orbis. First, we use the addresses of firm headquarters from FactSet as our
primary measure for firm location. Of course, firms’ plants and establishments might be located
8

remote from headquarters. Hence, we collect information on additional firm locations from Orbis.
In total, we obtain 1.1 million addresses of locations of incorporated subsidiaries, branches, and
establishments.5 We transform city, zip code, and street names into coordinates using the Bing Maps
API. To obtain a measure of geographic concentration, we calculate the share of firm establishments
located within a 30km radius of the firm’s headquarters.
Next, we apply two location-based data filters to our main sample: First, we remove dispersed
firms with fewer than 10% of assets within 30km of the firms’ headquarters. We choose this
cutoff following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), who limit their sample to firms with at least 10%
of employees at the headquarter locations.6 Second, we drop all supplier-customer-pairs with
headquarter locations within 500km of each other to limit the potential for firms to be affected by
the same shocks.7

2.4

Temperatures, Floods, and Climate Projections

We study two of the most pervasive types of shocks related to climate change – extreme heat and
floods – which are both projected to become more frequent and severe in the near future (CSSR,
2017). 8 While both extreme heat and floods can cause significant economic damage (see e.g.
Graff-Zivin et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018), the two types of weather shocks possibly affect firms’
operating performance and resulting propagation effects through different channels. This allows us
to compare how different weather shocks affect supply-chain formation, and use the heterogeneity in
the magnitudes and channels to assess the plausibility of our results. To capture both the occurrence
and intensity of these shocks, we use the number of days on which firms were affected by high heat
or floods per financial quarter as our main measures.
5
In principle, these addresses could encompass the headquarters of incorporated subsidiaries with additional
facilities. Apart from other data limitations, the data may therefore not represent the universe of firms’ locations.
6
We choose to restrict the sample of firms instead of aggregating shocks across locations, as the lack of consistent
data on the scope of economic activity across facilities makes it difficult to aggregate shocks across locations for
each firm in a meaningful way. In principle, we could attempt to aggregate shocks across locations using equal
weighting. However, we observe a large number of small locations, i.e. sales locations and dealerships in the case
of car manufacturers. Hence, equal weighting is conceptually inaccurate, and the value of pursuing this approach is
unclear as we could not distinguish actual null results from null results caused by incomplete observations of locations
and inaccurate weighting. The drawback of our approach is that measures of heat and flood exposure based on
headquarters are observed with noise, even after filtering out dispersed firms. However, the direction of this potential
measurement error is likely to bias our estimates in Sections 3.1 and 4 against finding significant effects.
7
As we discuss below, this filter is crucial for upholding the exclusion restriction. In robustness tests, we test the
sensitivity of our results to the threshold, and find very similar results when we impose a distance of 1000km instead.
8
In contrast, other types of natural disasters such as earthquakes and broad groupings of different hazard types,
which have been frequently studied in the literature, cannot be unambiguously linked to climate change.

9

2.4.1

Temperatures

We construct measures of firms’ exposure to high temperatures at the firm-quarter-level from
location-specific information on daily maximum temperatures. For this purpose, we rely on
the ERA5 re-analysis database from the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts
(ECMWF).9 The dataset provides global, daily coverage of a 0.25 × 0.25° latitude-longitude grid,
and is available starting in 1979 (Hersbach 2016).
We match daily maximum temperatures to customer and supplier firms using the closest ERA5
grid node and convert temperatures from Kelvin to Celsius. Our main measure of high heat exposure
is based on the literature on physiology, temperatures, and labor productivity (Graff-Zivin and
Neidell, 2014; Burke et al., 2015b; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016; Sepannen, Fisk, and Lei, 2006),
which documents a sharp decline in worker performance for temperatures above 30° C. Similarly,
the National Weather Service defines a heatwave based on a sequence of days with temperatures
exceeding a threshold of 90° F (32° C). Hence, we use a daily maximum temperature of 30° Celsius
as our main temperature threshold to define a day as hot. In extensive robustness tests, we also
combine this absolute threshold with relative definitions of high temperatures based on season- and
location-specific historical temperature distributions. Accounting for firms’ reporting schedules, we
sum the number of days on which firms are affected by high temperatures per financial quarter
as our main measure of heat exposure. In addition, we construct a measure of local heatwaves by
identifying spells of seven or more consecutive days with daily maximum temperatures over 30°
Celsius. Table 2d shows the related summary statistics.
2.4.2

Floods

Second, we obtain data on exceptional global surface water levels to determine whether firms are
affected by flooding incidents in a given quarter. While surface temperatures are the most commonly
cited consequence of global climate change, the scientific literature also indicates that flooding
incidents will increase in frequency and severity, i.e. due to heavy rainfall, rapid melting of snow
and ice, and parched soil (CSSR, 2017).
We gather information on floods from the Dartmouth Flood Observatory (DFO), which uses
Re-analyses are generated by interpolating local temperatures based on data from existing weather stations and
a number of other atmospheric data sources based on scientifically established climate models.
9

10

satellite images and remote sensing sources to identify inundated areas. In addition, the DFO collects
information on floods from news and governmental sources, and spatially maps materially affected
areas.10 The dataset includes start and end dates for each flood, detailed geographical information
on the inundated areas from 1984 until today, and information on the associated damages, size
of the affected area, and deaths. Based on the provided flood polygons, we spatially match the
coordinates of our sample firms to the flooded areas. Compared to the country-level flooding data
used in previous research, this approach allows us to determine more precisely if firm locations were
inundated. Similar to Section 2.4.1, we compute the number of days on which a firm was exposed to
flooding during each financial quarter, and additionally aggregate the incidence, count, and severity
indicators of floods on a quarterly basis as alternative measures. Table 2d shows flood-related
summary statistics at the firm-quarter level. On average, suppliers are exposed to floods in 6.4% of
all firm-quarters.11 Conditional on occurrence, floods in our sample last 10.74 days on average.
2.4.3

Temperature Projections

Third, we use data on temperature projections from the fifth phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5). The CMIP5 data are used extensively in the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Reports, and daily projections are made accessible by the
ECMWF.12 To make our measures of realized temperatures comparable with the projections, we
calculate the projected change at supplier locations as the average number of days over 30° Celsius
modelled from 2006 to 2019 and mid-century between 2040 to 2059. Moreover, we obtain climate
projections following the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 2.6, 4.5, and 8.5, which
provide different pathways of the future climate. The RCP 8.5 comes closest to a ‘business as
usual scenario’, which assumes very limited policy interventions directed at emissions reduction. To
capture cross-sectional variation in the projected change of temperatures, we obtain data for the
The DFO data includes both granular inundations and hand-mapped flood polygons which cover entire continents.
To remove extremely large polygons which are unlikely to reflect firms’ actual physical exposures, we limit the sample
to floods which exceed 333km in width. As this exclusion is discretionary, we test the sensitivity of the results to the
filter. We find very similar results for a more restrictive limitation of floods which do not exceed 100km in width.
11
The frequency of flood events in DFO appears plausible compared to the matched sample of firm-quarters with
EM-DAT disaster data (44% of firm-quarters instead of 6%). Of course, country-level information may overstate the
extent to which firms are affected if flood events only affect parts of the country. At the same time, only a subset of
the DFO flood events is registered in EM-DAT, as only incidents which caused ten or more casualties, affected more
than 100 people, lead to a state of emergency, or resulted in a call for international assistance are recorded.
12
An overview of various aspects of CMIP5 is provided by Hurrell, Visbeck, and Pirani (2011), and the primary
reference for experiment design is Taylor, Stouffer, and Meehl (2012).
10

11

periods from 2006 to 2019 and 2040 to 2059 from the MPI-ESM-LR model and average estimated
exposure across all available ensemble members.
2.4.4

Natural Disasters

For comparison and robustness tests in Section 3.1, we also include data from the international
disaster database EM-DAT, provided by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
(CRED, 2011). EM-DAT is one of the most commonly used global databases in the literature on
the economic cost of natural disasters.13 We distinguish if the temperature-related EM-DAT events
are heatwaves or cold spells, and aggregate flood and heat events at the firm quarter-level.

3

Physical Climate Risk and Firm Performance

3.1

Direct Exposure to Weather Shocks

Our main tests on the adaptation of supply chains rely on the assumption that heat and flood
events have economically important direct and indirect effects. To validate this assumption, we first
examine how these shocks affect supplier performance. Our two main variables for measuring firm
operating performance are revenues and operating income scaled by assets. In all tests, we lag assets
by one year to ensure that our results are not confounded by potential direct effects on assets.14
Of course, climate exposure and firm financial performance are likely endogenous in the crosssection. For example, if firms organize production to maximize profits and weather shocks affect
financial performance, managers may choose production locations based on existing climatic conditions. In contrast, both floods and heat days can only be predicted with precision over very short
horizons (i.e. days in advance), which are unlikely to allow for substantial adjustment in production
planning. Therefore, our empirical strategy aims to exploit short-term variation over time in weather
shocks within firms, which are plausibly exogenous and randomly distributed conditional on firm
locations and seasons.
To isolate this variation, we estimate OLS regressions with firm-by-fiscal-quarter fixed effects.
See for example Strömberg (2007); Noy (2009); Lesk, Rowhani, and Ramankutty (2016).
We focus on these two measures – as opposed to for example earnings – since revenues and operating income
are less subject to firms’ strategic accounting choices. This consideration is important, as the incentive to smooth
earnings might be particularly high following adverse financial shocks.
13
14

12

This empirical design is widely applied in environmental economics (Auffhammer, 2018; Dell et al.,
2014; Kolstad and Moore, 2020) and serves two important goals: First, firm fixed effects absorb
time-invariant and potentially endogenous firm-level characteristics. Second, by interacting firmwith quarter fixed effects, we mitigate concerns about potentially confounding firm-specific patterns
of seasonality. For example, certain types of firms earn higher revenues during the summer, which
could mechanically be correlated with the incidence of weather shocks.15 Further, we follow the
literature and include industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects to absorb any industry-specific time
trends and patterns. Since non-trivial changes to the climate might have occurred over our 15-year
sample period, we also include country-specific linear trends to control for confounding simultaneous
trends in local climate and firm performance.
To address the possibility that heat and floods randomly coincide with changes in firm characteristics over time, we also introduce size-, age-, and profitability-specific time fixed effects. For
this purpose, we sort all firms into size, age, and profitability terciles, which we interact with with
year-by-quarter fixed effects, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) (i.e. BS2016). We estimate
models of the following form at the quarterly frequency:
yit =

0
X

βt × Wit + µiq(t) + γn(i)t + θd(i)t + δBS2016,t + ϵit

(1)

t=−3

where yit is either Revenue/Assets or Operating Income/Assets of firm i in period (i.e. yearquarter) t, Wit measures weather shocks, i.e. the number of days on which firm i was exposed to
heat and floods in t, respectively. µiq(t) are firm by fiscal-quarter fixed effects, γn(i)t are industry
(of firm i) by year-quarter fixed effects based on 2-digit SIC codes, θd(i)t are country (of firm i)
linear trends at the quarterly frequency, and δBS2016,t are firm size, age, and profitability terciles
interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), we cluster robust
standard errors at the firm level. As it is ex-ante unclear if the financial impact of weather shocks
manifests immediately or with some delay throughout the financial year, we include three lags of
heat and flood days.
[Insert Table 3 here.]
15
Since firms likely differ in these seasonal patterns, quarterly fixed effects alone are not sufficient to address this
issue.

13

The results, reported in Table 3, indicate that both heat and floods adversely affect supplier
performance in our sample. In line with the findings of Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), the full
effect materializes over the course of the financial year but dissipates after three quarters. Focusing
on floods, one day of flooding at the firms’ headquarters is associated with an average decrease
in Revenue/Assets of 0.074 percentage points. In comparison, the daily damage caused by high
temperatures is smaller and translates to 0.042 percentage points.16 Compared to the average
revenues over assets per day – i.e. the quarterly value divided by the number of workdays per fiscal
quarter – one additional flood day (heat day) represents a decrease in daily scaled revenue of 18%
(12%). This magnitude is in line with effects of heat on worker performance documented in the
literature. For example, according to Sepannen et al. (2006), an increase in temperatures from 25
to 30° C decreases task performance in an office environment by 10%.
Further, we find that one additional day of flooding (heat) decreases quarterly Operating
Income/Assets by 0.019 (0.010) percentage points. These coefficients are economically meaningful:
The standard deviation in the number of affected days conditional on the occurrence of a flood or
heat event is 11.5 and 16.2 days, respectively. Thereby, the effect translates to a 17.2% (12.69%)
decrease for a one standard deviation increase in flood days (heat days).17
Given the larger effects on operating income compared to revenues, supplier profitability is likely
affected both through cost and revenue channels. Focusing on heat, the literature has documented
several economic channels driving aggregate economic losses. For instance, electricity prices increase
with heat exposure (Pechan and Eisenack, 2014), water supply tightens (Mishra and Singh, 2010),
and both cognitive and physical labor productivity are compromised (Sepannen et al., 2006; Xiang,
Bi, Pisaniello, and Hansen, 2014). Compared to heat, floods have a more direct and lasting negative
effect on physical capital, potentially damaging equipment, local infrastructure, and disrupting
production.18 This is consistent with the larger negative operating performance effects of floods
compared to heat documented in Table 3.
In Appendix Table A2, we further examine the heterogeneity of heat and flood effects by industry.
For heat, we observe particularly pronounced effects in agriculture, transportation, manufacturing,
These estimates are obtained by summing over the coefficient estimates for lags t = −4, ..., 0.
In robustness tests we replace heat and flood days with counting variables indicating the number of weather
shocks per financial quarter. Results are reported in Appendix Table A1 and corroborate the main result.
18
As the focus of our analysis lies on the indirect exposure to physical climate risk and adaptation of supply-chains,
we do not aim to uncover the precise mechanics driving the directly observable effects in this paper.
16

17

14

mining and construction, and services. These effects are in line with evidence on the negative
effect of heat on crop yields, outdoors industries, and labor and capital productivity.19 For floods,
we observe the strongest effects in industries with high asset tangibility, including mining and
construction, manufacturing, and agriculture, consistent with the idea that floods primarily affect
capital productivity.
A potential concern with our empirical design is that weather shocks are measured with error
for firms with geographically dispersed production sites. We validate our choice of matching heat
and floods with firms based on headquarter addresses by estimating the regression in Equation (1)
for different subsamples of firms depending on their geographic concentration. For this purpose, we
collect information on 1.1 million locations of incorporated subsidiaries, branches, and establishments,
and limit our sample to firms with at least 10% of assets within 30km of the firm’s headquarters.20
Figure 4 plots the results. For both floods and heat, the effect is consistently negative and increases
in magnitude with firm-level geographic concentration, providing supportive evidence for our location
matching strategy.21

3.2

Indirect Exposure to Weather Shocks

Next, we examine if heat and floods propagate along the supply-chain affecting the operations of
downstream firms. Previous research (e.g. Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Carvalho et al., 2021) has
documented performance spillovers along the supply chain following large-scale natural disasters. In
contrast to these shocks, heat and floods are closely linked to climate change. This is important
since the frequency of heat and flood occurrences is expected to change heterogeneously across the
world, and may lead firms to update their beliefs about the probability of their occurrence.
The downstream effects of weather shocks in production networks are theoretically ambiguous.
On the one hand, customers might already use risk management strategies such as multi-sourcing
to mitigate the propagation of shocks to suppliers. Similarly, if suppliers’ bargaining power is small,
their ability to pass on higher costs due to heat or flood exposure downstream may be limited. In
both cases, heat- and flood-related distortions would not propagate along the supply-chain, and we
See e.g. Zhang et al., 2018; Sepannen et al., 2006; Somanathan et al., 2015; Burke and Emerick, 2016.
The choice of this threshold is by nature arbitrary. We follow Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), who exclude firms
with fewer than 10% of employees at the headquarter.
21
However, the differences have to be interpreted with some caution given that firms in different concentration
quartiles might differ along other dimensions, which might in turn affect firms’ sensitivity to heat and floods.
19
20

15

should be unable to find a significant impact of climate shocks to suppliers on customer financial
performance. On the other hand, even small shocks resulting from heat or floods could increase
supplier costs, decrease production output, or cause supply-chain glitches, particularly given modern
just-in-time production systems. These disruptions are particularly likely to occur if the inputs
have a high level of specificity (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016) or when customers’ ability to procure
inputs from alternative sources is limited for other reasons.
We empirically test these competing hypotheses by examining whether customers’ operating
performance is affected by weather shocks to their suppliers. As in Section 3.1, we use revenue and
operating income (scaled by lagged assets) as our two main dependent variables. Since weather
shocks to suppliers might distort and strain supply-chain operations in ways not reflected in
financial performance, our tests likely understate the extent to which supplier-customer relationships
are challenged by floods and high temperatures. Further, heat and floods do not only affect
firms’ production facilities directly but also indirectly through transportation links and other local
infrastructure (Boehm et al., 2019; Carvalho et al., 2021). Since the main focus of our analysis is on
supply-chain adaptation, we do not aim to distinguish between immediate and indirect disruptions
of our sample suppliers in this analysis, as customers would have a strong incentive to mitigate
spillovers due to either type of disruption.
Our primary identifying assumption is that weather shocks are drawn randomly from the
underlying distribution over short horizons. We rely on this variation for causal interpretation of
the observed effects by estimating OLS regressions with firm-by-quarter fixed effects to account
for any firm-specific seasonal patterns. Hence, our results are identified from within-firm variation
in local climate realizations of remote suppliers.22 We further saturate our model with industryby-year-quarter fixed effects and country-specific time trends to account for time-series patterns
at the industry level and long-term trends in local climate, as in Equation (1). Therefore, even if
suppliers differ in their propensity of experiencing climate-relate shocks, unobserved characteristics
are unlikely to be driving our results given the random timing of our shocks. Any alternative
explanation for our results related to endogenous selection would have to systematically explain
22
In contrast, it would be problematic to study the effect of supplier exposure to physical risks on customers in the
cross-section, as the exposure of customers to weather shocks through suppliers may be endogenous. For example, if
certain industries systematically depend on specific inputs from suppliers clustered in risky areas, shocks and customer
firm performance could be endogenously determined.

16

both changes in supplier climate-shock occurrence and customer firm performance over time, in a
way that is not captured by firm-specific seasonality, industry patters, and country-level trends.
A potential concern with our empirical design is the possibility that both supplier and customer
could be simultaneously affected by a given shock, either directly, through local infrastructure,
or simultaneous demand-side effects. To address this potential threat to the exclusion restriction,
we exclude all customers-supplier pairs with customers located within a 500 kilometer radius of
the affected supplier from our analysis. Following the literature (e.g. Kale and Shahrur, 2007;
Banerjee et al., 2008; Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Campello and Gao, 2017; Cen, Maydew, Zhang,
and Zuo, 2017; Phua, Tham, and Wei, 2018), we collapse our supplier-customer panel at the
customer-year-quarter level and estimate OLS regressions of the following form at the quarterly
frequency:
yct =

0
X

βt × Wct + µcq(t) + γn(c)t + θd(c)t + δBS2016,t + ϵct

(2)

t=−3

where yct is either Revenue/Assets or Operating Income/Assets of customer c in period (i.e.
year-quarter) t. Wct is the sum of heat or flood days, respectively, across the locations of all suppliers
of customer c in period t. Further, µcq(t) are customer by fiscal-quarter fixed effects, γd(c)t are
industry (of customer c) by year-quarter fixed effects, θd(c)t are country (of customer c)-specific
quarterly trends. Similar to Equation (1), we add size, age, and profitability by year-quarter fixed
effects (δBS2016,t ) to control for different firm profiles. Robust standard errors are clustered at the
customer level. As in Section 3.1, we include 3 lags of W .
3.2.1

Results

The results show that both heat (Table 4a) and floods (Table 4b) in the locations of the suppliers
negatively affect the financial performance of downstream customers. Specifically, we find that
one additional day of heat across all supplier locations decreases customer revenues over assets by
0.0055 percentage points. Further, one additional day of flooding at supplier locations decreases
customer revenues by 0.0229 percentage points.23 Our results are similar for operating income. One
additional day of heat and flooding at supplier locations decreases quarterly customer operating
income over assets by 0.0007 and 0.004 percentage points, respectively.
23

Similar to Section 3.1, these estimates are obtained by summing over the coefficient estimates for lags t = −4, ..., 0.

17

Compared to the the direct effects shown in Table 3, the indirect effects of climate-shock exposure
on customers as documented in Table 4 are considerably smaller in magnitude. For flood days (heat
days), the economic magnitude of the indirect effect on customers is equivalent to 31% (13.1%) of
the direct effect on the supplier. The magnitude of the indirect effect on operating income is as
large as 21% (7%) of the direct effect. Both, the significantly larger financial cost for customers and
the higher relative spillover effect of floods compared to heat are consistent with the idea that floods
represent more severe disruptions than heat days, affecting both human and physical capital through
direct and indirect channels such as local transportation links, ports, and other infrastructure.
[Insert Table 4 here.]
The estimated effects are sizeable in economic terms: one day of supplier flood (heat) exposure
decreases revenues over assets of a remote customer by 5.6% (1.3%) relative to the sample average
per work day. The percentages translate into substantial absolute values, with a median downstream
distortion of 91,000 (22,000) USD in revenue per affected flood (heat) day. Given standard deviations
of flood days (heat days) of 11.5 (16.2) days conditional on occurrence, the downstream effect of
a representative shock amounts to indirect costs of over 1 million and 350,000 USD, respectively.
Hence, the observed shocks represent material disruptions for customers – particularly given that
both heat days and inundations are projected to increase in frequency and severity.24
The operating income effects are consistently larger than the effects on revenues in percentage
terms. This is consistent with the idea that customers are affected by supplier shocks through
channels affecting both costs and productivity, as supply chain glitches may require costly shortrun adaptations by customers. This is broadly in line with the literature on multi-sourcing and
endogenous production networks (Du, Lu, and Tao, 2009; Antràs et al., 2017; Gervais, 2018), which
highlights the trade-off between input cost minimization and risk diversification.
3.2.2

Robustness

To examine the robustness of our result, we use alternative measures of W to estimate Equation
(2). We first replace continuous measures of heat and flood days with indicator variables taking
the value of one, if at least one heatwave (i.e. seven consecutive days with temperatures above
Given the fact that firms may have adapted their operations in this expectation already, these estimations are
likely to represent a lower bound of the ex-ante costs of indirect shocks.
24

18

30° C) or flood occurred across suppliers per customer quarter in Appendix Table A3a. Second,
while our heat measure follows the literature on temperatures and labor productivity (Graff-Zivin
and Neidell, 2014; Burke et al., 2015b), concerns might remain that the effect of heat differs across
locations depending on the local climate and existing adaptations. Hence, in Appendix Table A3b,
we introduce an alternative measure of heat days combining an absolute and relative threshold.
Specifically, for each customer-quarter, we count the number of days on which the temperature
exceeded both 30°C and the 95th percentile of historical local temperatures across supplier locations.
We also include tests retaining only severe flooding incidents in Appendix Table A3b, as defined by
the NOAA. The results in both panels are similar to our main findings.
Next, we verify that our estimates do not exhibit any significant pre-trends to validate the
identifying assumption that short-term weather shocks are drawn randomly from the underlying
climate distribution. Figure 5 plots the coefficient estimates of βt from Equation (2) for quarters
t ∈ [−4, ..., 6]. As shown, the coefficient estimates are insignificant and close to zero before the
occurrence of both heatwaves and floods. While the effect of supplier heatwaves on customer
performance materializes with a lag of one quarter and reverts to pre-event levels within one to
two quarters, we find an immediate effect of supplier floods that remains large and significant for
three to four quarters. This is consistent with our previous findings in Table 4 and the idea that
heatwaves and floods affect firm performance spillovers through different mechanisms.25
Next, we examine if particularly the shocks which are not intense enough to be captured by
a disaster database, but projected to become much more frequent due to climate change, are
economically relevant. Table A4 shows the estimates of Equation (2) using only weather shocks
which are not recorded in the global disaster database EM-DAT. The results are similar to our main
results, indicating that our findings are not solely driven by the very largest shocks.
3.2.3

Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity

We next explore cross-sectional differences in the propagation of weather shocks to study the
economic mechanisms behind our findings in Section 3.2. First, all else equal, the effect of supplier
climate shocks on customer firm performance should increase with the magnitude of supplier
Consistent with Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), both heat and flood shocks have a temporary effect. Barrot and
Sauvagnat (2016) find a lag of three quarters studying the propagation effect of hurricanes from suppliers to customers,
focusing on sales growth instead of operating income.
25

19

disruptions. Hence, we construct measures of supplier asset tangibility and industry vulnerability as
outlined in Section 2.2 to test if the propagation effect is larger for more vulnerable suppliers.26
Second, we only expect to find a propagation effect of heat and floods if suppliers are able to
(partially) pass on the related costs downstream, or if customers are unable to mitigate supply-chain
disruptions. To test this idea, we collect the following proxies detailed in Section 2.2: ‘supplier
industry competitiveness’ captures the relative supplier bargaining power, ‘industry-level input
concentration’, ‘customer inventory’, and ‘supplier diversification’ are proxies for the dependence
of the customer on the inputs of a given supplier, and ‘sales correlation’ and ‘relationship length’
capture the depth of integration between a supplier and customer.
We aggregate over the total number of heat and flood days across each customer’s suppliers over
the contemporaneous and previous three quarters, and interact this variable with the mean supplier,
customer, and firm-pair characteristics listed above.27 Table 5 shows the results.28
[Insert Table 5 here.]
We first consider differences in the nature of heat and flood events. Consistent with the literature, we
find a significantly stronger propagation effect of high temperatures for suppliers in the agricultural,
mining, and construction sectors in Column (2) of Table 5a. Further, we do not find a significant
interaction effect of heat days and supplier asset tangibility. In contrast, the effect of flood-related
supplier disruptions (Table 5b) is concentrated in customers with both high supplier capital intensity
(Column 1) and high supplier labor intensity (Column 2), indicating that floods affect both labor
and capital productivity.
Focusing on input substitutability and customer dependence, we find a statistically significant
moderating effect of supplier industry competitiveness on the propagation of both heat and floods.
This finding indicates that customers’ ability to switch suppliers and low supplier bargaining power
reduce customer exposure to suppliers’ physical risk. Similarly, we find that shock propagation
is exacerbated when the customer industry relies more heavily on inputs from a single supplier
industry, and mitigated for high customer inventory holdings (heat and floods) and supplier
The literature has documented that particularly firms with a large proportion of physical assets and labor-intensive
(outdoor) activities are sensitive to heat and floods.
27
All cross-sectional characteristics are lagged by one year to address concerns that our explanatory variables
themselves are affected by the observed shocks.
28
The dependent variables in Table 5 are scaled by 100 and the results for revenues are shown in Table A5.
26

20

diversification (heat). Last, while the results show that supplier-customer sales correlation increases
shock propagation, we find the opposite, mitigating effect for supply-chain pairs with a long
relationship length.
3.2.4

Other Outcomes

In our next set of tests, shown in Table 6, we further explore the underlying economic channels
by examining other customer firm outcomes, including operating margin, supplier diversification,
accounts payables, costs of goods sold, and inventory (all scaled by one-year lagged total assets).
[Insert Table 6 here.]
In line with the idea that heat- and flood-related disruptions may require costly adjustments,
e.g. input sourcing from alternative suppliers, we find a significant negative effect of heat and flood
days on customer operating margin in Column (1). For example, a one standard deviation increase
in flood days (11.5 days conditional on occurrence) translates into a 2.7% decrease in customer
operating margins relative to the sample mean. Further, in line with the idea that customers are
unable to fully replace the inputs purchased from disrupted suppliers, we find a significant negative
effect of supplier heat and flood days on the volume of inputs purchased (i.e. customer accounts
payables and COGS), and customer inventory in Columns (3) to (5). Last, we find that customers
increase their supplier-base, i.e. the number of suppliers scaled by one-year lagged assets, following
weather shocks at their existing suppliers. The effect indicates an increase in supplier base by 0.5%
relative to the sample mean for a one-standard deviation increase in supplier flood days.

4

Supply-Chain Adaptation

4.1

Realized and Expected Climate Risk

If weather shocks are financially material and change in frequency over time, firms may face
incentives to adapt their production networks. In this section, we lay out conceptually how local
trends in the frequency of climate events could affect firms’ decisions to continue or terminate
existing supply-chain relationships. Subsequently, we empirically estimate the magnitude of firms’
responses to perceived changes in climate risk based on observable supply-chain adjustments.
21

4.1.1

Conceptual Framework

We study the decision P to either continue or terminate existing supply-chain relationships made
by N identical customers producing output Q under perfect competition. We assume that the
customers’ production follows a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of capital K and labor L to yield a quantity
Q, and requires a fixed set of inputs M besides labor and capital. This set of inputs is sourced
from S identical suppliers, which are also subject to production under perfect competition. In this
setting, capital investments are fixed in the short-run. This condition is important, as many types
of supply chain relationships require substantial, relationship-specific investments (Dass, Kale, and
Nanda, 2015; Dasgupta, Zhang, and Zhu, 2020). Customer managers carefully trade off supplier
characteristics and input costs before placing initial orders in order to maximize profits, as profits
depend on the quantities qi and prices pi of used inputs i ∈ M .
We define heat and flooding days conditional on location and season as shocks W . W in period
t is randomly drawn from a normal distribution with possibly time varying mean ωt and standard
deviation σt , i.e. Wt ∼ N (ωt , σt ).29 As in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), W can cause deviations
in the availability of one input of production from its first-best level qi∗ to its constrained level
qi < qi∗ .30 As documented in the previous section, these constraints can be costly even for shocks of
relatively small magnitude.
Customers make input decisions and commit to relationship-specific investments before weather
shocks are realized. Therefore, they consider the parameters of the distribution of W before
committing to any supplier s ∈ S.31 Inputs sourced by customers and outputs produced by suppliers
are determined in equilibrium, yielding the matches of customers to suppliers, the prices pi , and the
quantities of inputs qi . The resulting pairwise matches of customers and suppliers are such that
customers would not be willing to accept an increase in the exposure of the supplier to physical
climate risks without an adjustment of input prices. As is standard in the literature, we begin by
assuming that both suppliers and customers are price takers in product markets. Therefore, we
The intuition of our framework also applies if we assume alternative production functions or distributions for W .
Alternatively, Kelly et al. (2005) model production as a function of input choices and an exogenous shocks in a
multi-period model.
31
For this purpose, managers may not have access to climate projections, a condition that we discuss more carefully
below. However, we assume that there is wide access to information about past weather shocks. For instance, when
choosing a supplier in a flood-prone area, managers may learn about past events from the suppliers’ disclosures,
internal information, or local news. Similarly, heatwaves and droughts may be discussed by regional, national, or
international news outlets.
29
30

22

focus on customers’ decisions P to terminate existing supplier relationships in a partial equilibrium,
and study if customers respond to perceived changes in climate risks.32
We assume that customers estimate the parameters of the distribution of W before entering a
new supply-chain relationship. As in Kelly et al. (2005), they form a prior about the mean of this
distribution, ω0 , based on historical information.33 Due to climate change, the parameters of the
underlying distribution including ωt may change over time. Since customers cannot directly observe
ωt , they assess their suppliers’ shock exposure during the supply-chain relationship every period.
They gradually learn about ωt by calculating the average number of realized shocks per year in
t since the beginning of the relationship at k = 0, i.e. W̄t =

Pt
k=0

t

Wk

. Assuming that individual

customers cannot influence market prices, increases from ω0 to ωt may hence render a previously
optimal choice of a supplier sub-optimal. In contrast, when the realized shocks Wt are below or in
line with the ex-ante expectation ω0 , customers have no incentive to reassess their choice of supplier.
This intuition allows us to describe the relevant decision for customers as:

Pt =




0,

if W̄t ≤ ω0



1,

if W̄t > ω0

(3)

where Pt is the customers’ decision to terminate the supply-chain relationship in year t, W̄t is the
average number of realized shocks per year in t since the beginning of the relationship, and ω0 is
the expected value of W based on historical information available at k = 0.
To make decisions about the adjustment of supplier networks, firms could use two types of
information. First, firms could observe recent climate realizations and base decisions on perceived
gradual changes. A large literature in finance and economics has proposed Bayesian updating to
model how economic agents infer information about changing environments in general (i.e. Alevy
et al., 2007; Chiang et al., 2011). In the context of climate change, this approach is not without
difficulty: In the short- and medium-term, weather outcomes provide a noisy signal of potential
changes in the underlying climate distribution. Nevertheless, empirical studies have shown that
This choice is motivated by the fact that we cannot observe prices and quantities, and that it is ex-ante unclear
if and how firms at large respond to (perceived) changes in supplier exposure. Beyond the scope of this paper, it is
important to better understand effects in the general equilibrium. For instance, the question how increased risk of
disruptions affects the value of access to international suppliers provides interesting avenues for future research.
33
While we note that changes in other moments of the climate distribution may also affect supplier-customer
matches, we choose to focus on changes in the mean ω.
32

23

individuals exhibit behavior consistent with Bayesian learning, i.e. in terms of efforts to understand
changing climate distributions from their own experience (Deryugina, 2013; Moore, 2017; Kelly
et al., 2005; Kala, 2019; Choi et al., 2020).
Alternatively, firms could use forward-looking models of climate change to assess expected
changes, and interpolate expectations for future periods based on current and projected probabilities
of weather events (Moore, 2017). As outlined by Fiedler et al. (2021), in practice this approach
is impractical for most businesses: First, while numerous climate projections has been published
by the IPCC in recent years, assessing the relative strengths of the various scientific models is
challenging. Second, supply-chain managers typically make decisions for the short- and medium-run,
and projecting climate change is particularly difficult at these horizons. Third, business decisions
require granular information in spatial terms. However, the usefulness of downscaled regional or
global models can be challenging to assess, despite the fact that their output offers numerical
precision. Due to these challenges, it appears reasonable to assume that firms at large did not
incorporate forward-looking information in their decision making in our sample period from 2003 to
2016. Hence, our empirical tests focus on firms’ responses to experienced risk exposure.
We establish four testable hypotheses. First, under perfect competition, customer-supplier
relationships in equilibrium reflect the expected exposure to physical climate risk which customers
are willing to accept for a given set of other supplier characteristics and input prices. Hence,
changes in the mean of the distribution may render previously optimal customer-supplier matches
sub-optimal:
Hypothesis 1 An increase in the number of realized shocks beyond what customers could have
expected ex-ante increases the probability that a given supply-chain relationship is terminated.
Since we do not observe whether supply-chain relationships were ended by customers or suppliers,
our analysis is potentially confounded by supply-side disruptions. To investigate if the observed
termination decisions can be attributed to demand-side effects, we test if the characteristics of the
relation of supply-chain terminations and weather shocks are in line with patters of learning on
behalf of customers. Namely, if customers behave consistently with models of Bayesian learning, we
would expect that they respond more strongly when the observed deviations are larger in magnitude,
or when the signal is repeated over multiple periods over time:
24

Hypothesis 2 The relation of increases in the number of realized weather shocks beyond what
customers could have expected ex-ante and the probability for a given supply-chain relationship to
end is more pronounced when such deviations are larger in magnitude.
Hypothesis 3 The relation of increases in the number of realized weather shocks beyond what
customers could have expected ex-ante and the probability for a given supply-chain relationship to
end is more pronounced when such deviations persist over a prolonged period of time.
Further, we note that it is unlikely for supply-side mechanisms to be the main driver of the
results in our context, as the shocks are geographically concentrated events of limited magnitude.
We also test this assumption explicitly. If supply-side disruptions were driving our results, we would
expect that the effect of transitory shocks on supply-chain terminations is of a similar magnitude as
the exceedance of ex-ante climate risk expectations:34
Hypothesis 4 Transitory shocks to suppliers increase the probability that a given supply-chain
relationship is terminated.
Whereas we focus on demand-side adaptation, suppliers may also adapt to increasing frequencies
of weather shocks. As we do not observe such adaptation investments, our results could represent a
lower bound due to the fact that customers would not have to switch suppliers if suppliers became
more resilient.
4.1.2

Assumptions

Before turning to the estimations, we consider two of our main assumptions in detail. First, our
framework assumes that both customers and suppliers operate under perfect competition. However,
product markets may be concentrated, allowing customers or suppliers to extract rents. Under
imperfect competition, such rents can be represented as a latent variable, λ, which would increase
the tolerance of customers to changes in climate risks as follows:
The test is similarly subject to the challenge that it is impossible to cleanly disentangle demand- and supply-side
driven terminations. Therefore, we might overestimate the magnitude of the effect of transitory shocks if customers
over-respond to salient, transitory shocks despite the fact that those could have been anticipated. Previous studies
have documented that firms are prone to availability bias in responding to salient events in related settings. For
example, Dessaint and Matray (2017) find that managers adjust firms’ cash holdings when nearby firms are hit by
natural disasters, even if firms have not been directly exposed to these hazards.
34

25

Pt =




0,

if W̄t ≤ ω0 + λ



1,

if W̄t > ω0 + λ

(4)

Intuitively, maintaining existing relationships may be optimal for customers with market power
even if average realized annual shocks W̄t exceed ex-ante expected shocks ω0 . Since we cannot
directly observe λ, this would lead us to underestimate the effect of an increase in ωt on terminations,
as our empirical measure captures only cases in which the historical mean of ω0 but not the actual
tolerance of the customer (i.e. ω0 +λ) is exceeded. Further, when suppliers benefit from concentrated
input markets, customers may be bound to certain suppliers for a lack of alternatives. This would
similarly increase the tolerance of customers to supplier climate risk and increase the threshold
exposure to ω0 + γ. In addition to these considerations, we explicitly test the plausibility of our
results using industry and firm characteristics as proxies for λ0 and γ.
Second, we have thus far assumed that customers form a point prior of the expected risk exposure
of suppliers. However, customers only observe an approximation of the true distribution at the
beginning of the relationship. We think about the resulting additional uncertainty as a band around
the mean of ω0 , increasing the threshold to ω0 + δ. The magnitude of δ is unobservable and may
vary by customer and supplier. Instead of imposing an arbitrary band around the point prior in our
estimations, we therefore note that our measure may capture incidents where W̄t exceeds ω0 but not
ω0 + δ. In this case, our measure indicates an exceedance of the ex-ante expectations which does not
lead customers to take action, resulting in a potential source of downward bias for our estimations.
4.1.3

Empirical Strategy

To test our hypotheses, we construct a measure to capture if weather shocks have increased beyond
customers’ ex-ante expectations, as illustrated in Figure 2. According to our conceptual framework,
we assume that customers form a prior ω0 (i.e. expected weather shocks) based on the historical
number of shocks per year at the supplier location before the start of any given supplier-customer
relationship.35 Starting at the beginning of the relationship, customers then evaluate their experience
and update their beliefs about whether the ex-ante expected exposure is exceeded every year based
Since firms’ time horizon for this benchmark period is unclear, we conduct robustness checks with different
horizons over five, ten, and fifteen year periods.
35

26

on the average number of observed shocks W̄t (i.e. realized weather shocks). Our main measure,
1 (Realized > Expected Shocks)sct , takes the value of one in year t if the average number of
realized shocks per year since the beginning of the relationship sc exceeds the corresponding prior for
supplier s, and zero otherwise.36 As our outcome variable, we use the end dates of customer-supplier
relationships from Factset Revere. In a panel of active customer-supplier-year observations, we set
the indicator variable 1 (End)sct to one in the last year of any reported supply-chain relationship.
To address concerns about censoring, we drop all observations from the last year of our sample.
Our identification strategy is similar to the long-differences approach introduced by Burke and
Emerick (2016), and relies on the fact that short-run climate realizations, in contrast to long-run
changes, are quasi-randomly assigned across locations. Intuitively, our empirical design leverages
the idea that managers can incorporate expected levels of climate risk exposure but not deviations
from the expectation into their decision making. Figures 6a and 6b provide supporting evidence for
this identifying assumption, by plotting the difference between Realized and Expected Shocks, and
the residual variation of this difference after absorbing high dimensional time-varying regional fixed
effects. As shown in Figures 6a and 6b, the distribution is largely unaffected by including the fixed
effects, in line with the idea that the underlying short-term trends are quasi-randomly assigned
and not determined at the country- and/or year-level. Based on this reasoning, we estimate the
following linear probability model at the annual frequency:
1 (End)sct = β × 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks)sct + γn(s)t + γn(c)t + θd(s)d(c)t + ϵsct

(5)

To further control for potential confounding effects which may be correlated with both climate
trends and other reasons for relationship terminations, we estimate this model with several dimensions
of fixed effects. First, we include both supplier and customer industry-by-year fixed effects, γn(s)t
and γn(c)t , to account for industry trends, related for example to trends in make-or-buy choices.
Second, we add supplier-country by customer-country by year fixed effects θd(s)d(c)t to account
for changes in macroeconomic conditions, trade barriers, or import-related costs.37 We cluster
robust standard errors at the relationship level. To address concerns about a potential violation of
In additional tests, we use the continuous difference, i.e. (Realized − Expected Shocks)sct .
Since our main variable of interest is differenced at the relationship-level, relationship or firm fixed effects would
obscure the economic interpretation of the effect and are hence not included in this specification.
36

37

27

the exclusion restriction, we exclude all firm pairs with customers located within a 500 kilometer
radius of the affected supplier to ensure that the observed trends affect suppliers only.38 Hence,
for any alternative explanations to be driving our results, unobservable characteristics would have
to systematically change in those firm-pairs where realized shocks exceeded expectations, in a way
that is unrelated to industry- or country-level trends.
4.1.4

Results

Table 7 reports the estimates obtained from Equation (5). Across all specifications, we find that
existing suppliers are more likely to be terminated when the realized exposure to days with high
temperatures or flooding exceeds customers’ prior expectations, in line with Hypothesis (1). Under
the most stringent specification, the coefficients of 1 (Realized > Expected) for both heat and flood
days are positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. The linear probability model estimates
presented in Panel 7a indicate a 0.004 to 0.009 (0.010 to 0.015) percentage point increase in the
likelihood of supplier termination for heat days (flood days) exceedance of expectations, respectively.
Compared to the unconditional sample mean of 0.26, this represents an increase of 3.5 to 5.8%.
[Insert Table 7 here.]
To facilitate the interpretation of the economic magnitudes of this effect, we also estimate
conditional logistic regressions in Panel 7b. The results show that suppliers’ exposure to flood
days increases the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination on average by 7.9 to 11.1%,
significant at the 1%-level across all specifications. In comparison, the effect of increases in heat
exposure over prior expectations on supplier termination is 6.1 to 7.8%. The difference in the
magnitude between floods and heat is in line with the stronger direct and indirect effects of floods
compared to heat documented in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.
4.1.5

Learning from Experienced Change

So far, we provide evidence that firms are more likely to terminate existing supplier relationships
when weather shock experiences exceed expectations. To better understand if firms’ behavior is in
line with standard models of Bayesian updating, we test two related predictions. First, if firms use
38

Tests with a 1000 kilometers radius yield very similar results.

28

Bayes rule to learn about potential changes in the climate risk exposure of their suppliers, we would
also expect that the likelihood of terminations increases with the length of the periods during which
these deviations persist (Moore, 2017), i.e. Hypothesis (2). Second, we should observe that stronger
deviations lead to more pronounced effects (Deryugina, 2013), i.e. Hypothesis (3).
[Insert Table 8 here.]
In Table 8a, we first estimate changes in the likelihood of supplier termination as a function
of the number of years during which realized weather shocks exceed customers’ priors.39 In line
with Hypothesis (2), we find that the effect on the likelihood of supplier termination increases when
the condition persists for multiple years, and is particularly strong for the second signal. After two
years, a prolonged observation of the deviation continues to increase the probability of supplier
termination, but with a decreasing marginal effect.40
Moreover, we test if firms’ responses increase with the magnitude of the signal. We estimate
Equation (5) using the continuous measure Realized − Expected Shockssct instead of an indicator
variable and present results in Panel 8b. Consistent with Bayesian learning and Hypothesis (3),
we find that the likelihood of supplier terminations increases with the magnitude of the deviation,
measured in heat and flood days.
4.1.6

Supply-side Disruptions

For clarity of the exposition, we started by describing the observable outcome of supply-chain
terminations as a function of customers’ decision making. In reality, the outcome could be driven
by both supply- and demand-side dynamics. If supply-side disruptions caused by transitory heat
and flood shocks drive our results, we would expect that the effect of such transitory shocks is of a
similar magnitude as the exceedance of ex-ante climate risk expectations. Further, availability bias
could influence customers’ decisions about replacing suppliers if firms react to recent, salient events
(Dessaint and Matray, 2017). In this case, we would expect the likelihood of supplier termination
to increase with recent weather shocks, i.e. Hypothesis (4). We test this hypothesis by replacing
We collapse relationships with more than five signal and impose no functional form on the marginal effect of the
first five repetitions of the signal 1 (Realized > Expected).
40
This decrease in effect size is consistent with the idea that some relationships may not be terminated for structural
reasons, and hence a high number of repetitions may indicate the resilience of the relationship.
39

29

our measures of climate-risk exceedance in Equation (5) with contemporaneous weather shocks, i.e.
Realized Heat Days and Realized F lood Days, as our main independent variables.
[Insert Table 9 here.]
Our results, presented in Table 9, show a statistically significant, positive effect of contemporary
heat and flood events on supply-chain termination in columns (1) and (5). However, compared to
the effect of climate-risk exceedance, i.e. Realized − Expected heat and flood days in Columns
(2), (4), (6), and (8), the effect is economically small. For example, the coefficient estimate of
Realized − Expected Heat Days (significant at the 1% level) is about seven times larger than
the corresponding coefficient for Realized Heat Days (significant at the 10% level). Tests for
differences in coefficients between contemporary shocks to climate-risk exceedance are statistically
significant across all specifications. This finding further supports our interpretation that supply-chain
relationships are not primarily terminated because of (temporary) disruptions of supplier operations
and input availability, but due to changes in customers’ perceptions of climate-change related risks.
To further address concerns about supply-side terminations, we also test if the effects are driven
by suppliers which cease operations following a weather shock. The findings, presented in Appendix
Table A7a, remain similar when we exclude suppliers which were delisted within two years of the
relationship end date from the sample.
4.1.7

Robustness

We conduct several robustness tests. First, our main test uses a ten-year benchmark period before
the start of any given relationship to estimate customers’ priors. To test the sensitivity of our results
to this choice, we estimate Equation (5) using alternative benchmark periods of 5 and 15 years. As
shown in Appendix Table A6, all estimates remain similar in magnitude and statistical significance.
Second, we set our main independent variable to zero in the first year of the supply chain
relationship. Since we estimate priors as the expected exposure prior to the start of the relationship,
there is a 50% chance of exceeding this prior in the first relationship year. Hence, the first signal
might not be particularly informative to managers. In line with this idea, our results increase in
magnitude when we set the first year to zero in Appendix Table A7b.

30

Third, 6.37% of supply-chains in our sample are terminated, but eventually re-established at some
point. As Appendix Table A7c shows, our results are unaffected when excluding these observations.
Fourth, we consider the duration of supplier-customer relationships as an alternative measure
of supply-chain stability, as in Fee, Hadlock, and Thomas (2006) and Phua et al. (2018). In this
test, the dependent variable is the number of years from the beginning to the end of a given
supplier-customer relationship. We drop relationships that were terminated and subsequently
restarted at some point in our sample, and code observations that are active in the last year of
our sample as right censored, following the literature. The main independent variable is defined
as max [1(Realized > Expected Shocks)] within each supplier-customer relationship. Instead of
including fixed effects as in our OLS estimations, we stratify regressions with the first year of each
relationship (FY), customer- and supplier-by-industry-by-FY and supplier-country-by-FY. Appendix
Table A8 shows Cox proportional hazard model estimates of the effect of increases in supplier
climate-risk exposure on relationship duration. In line with the previously presented results, the
estimates indicate that relationship duration decreases by 0.23 to 0.46 years (0.32 to 0.4 years) when
the realized number of days affected by heat (floods) exceeds expectations.
4.1.8

Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity

To test the plausibility of our main result, we explore the effect of cross-sectional differences at the
supplier, customer, and relationship level. In particular, we interact our main variable of interest
in Equation (5) with proxies of supplier-industry competitiveness, customer input dependence,
and supply-chain integration to study the role of these characteristics for the effect of climate-risk
exceedance on supplier termination. Table 10 reports the results.
[Insert Table 10 here.]
If our findings are driven by customers who substitute potentially risky suppliers, we would
expect to find a stronger effect when competition in the supplier industry is high, i.e. when γ in our
conceptual framework is small. Similar to Table 5, we use the number of firms in the SIC 2-digit
supplier industry as a proxy for the number of potential replacement suppliers and find results
consistent with this conjecture. As shown in Column (1) of Table 10, a one-standard deviation
increase in supplier-industry competitiveness more than doubles the effect of climate-risk exceedance
31

on supplier-termination, relative to the average effect ([0.006 + 0.009 × 0.807]/0.006 = 2.2), for
flood days. Consistent with this result we find a negative, albeit statistically imprecise, effect of
industry-input concentration, i.e. customers who procure a larger proportion of their total inputs
from one industry in Column (2).
We next study the role of relationship length and sales correlation on the effect of shock
exceedance on supplier termination. Focusing on floods, we find negative coefficient estimates
(significant at the 1% level) for the interaction terms of both relationship length and suppliercustomer sales correlation with flood related ‘climate-risk exceedance’. We find qualitatively similar
results, albeit statistically insignificant estimates for sales correlation, when considering heat. This
finding is in line with the notion that relationship-specific investments increase switching costs
of customers. As supply-chains become more closely integrated, the cost of terminating existing
relationships increases and hence modulates customers’ reactions to experienced weather shocks in
excess of expectation.

4.2

Experienced Heat Days and Temperature Projections

Our previous tests indicate that firms form expectations about climate risks based on backwardlooking historical information. However, this approach is not without difficulty as weather outcomes
provide a noisy signal of persistent changes. As the plots illustrating the identifying variation in
Figures 6a and 6b show, the perceived changes in exposure are not necessarily representative of
trends in the mean of local distributions of weather shocks. To investigate possible limitations
of firms’ learning processes based on experienced change, we examine how firms respond when
experienced changes differ from future projections.
To do so, we focus on cases where the change in local heat days until mid-century is projected to
be close to zero. If projections indicate minimal change in local climate going forward, relationshipspecific investments to adopt new suppliers in response to short-term trends may be undesirable.
We again implement Equation (5), but estimate the regression model for subsamples in which there
is little projected change in long-term temperatures according to the RCP 2.6 (column 1), RCP
4.5 (column 2), and RCP 8.5 (column 3) scenarios. Specifically, we focus on observations for which
the projected difference in number of heat days comparing the periods 2006–2019 and 2049–2060 is
smaller than 7 days per year under the respective scenario. The three scenarios represent three of
32

the main trajectories adopted by the IPCC, with the RCP 2.6 representing a very stringent scenario
with strong policy intervention. RCP 8.5 is closest to a business as usual scenario, assuming very
limited policy interventions directed at emissions reduction.
[Insert Table 11 here.]
Table 11 presents the results for these estimations. Panel 11a shows the results when we estimate
priors over a 10 year period before the start of each relationship, Panel 11b uses a 15 year formation
period. Across all climate scenarios and specifications, we find that the magnitude of responses to
deviations of expected and experienced climate risk are indistinguishable from our main results in
Section 7. One possible interpretation of this result is that firms respond to experienced changes
regardless of whether these changes are indicative of projected trends. As Moore (2017) points
out, adaptation will only occur at the speed at which economic agents learn about climate change.
If investments are based on perceived short-term changes, adaptation may insufficiently reflect
long-term projections and progress slower than necessary.

5

Climate Risk Exposure and Supplier Replacement

In the last part of our analysis, we examine how climate risk exposure affects replacement choices
and the selection of new suppliers. This helps us address two questions raised by our previous
analyses: First, do firms deliberately manage climate risk factors? If customers observe the adverse
financial effects of indirect weather shocks, but are agnostic about the underlying driver, we would
not expect to see permanent decreases in the risk exposure of ‘new’ (i.e. replacement) compared to
‘old’ (i.e. terminated) suppliers.
Second, how do firms assess noisy climate signals obtained from short-run climate realizations?
We generally assume that customers evaluate existing suppliers and potential replacements during
the initial supplier-relationship. Hence, if firms primarily respond to experienced shocks, but do
not take into account that these signals are noisy in the short-run, replacement suppliers may
have experienced more favorable conditions during the initial supplier-relationship despite having a
similar underlying climate distribution as the ‘old’ suppliers.
To address these questions, we limit our dataset to supplier-customer links with a known end
33

date. For each supplier whose relationship with a customer ends throughout our sample period
(i.e. ‘replaced’ supplier), we identify likely ‘replacement’ suppliers who enter a new supply-chain
relationship with the same customer in the following year. We require replacement candidates to
have the same 4-digit SIC code as the ‘old’ supplier. As before, we drop customer-supplier pairs
located in the same geographic region, and exclude customers and suppliers in the financial industry
and firms with a concentration of facilities around the headquarters below 10%. After applying
these filters, we identify replacement suppliers for 16,900 customer-supplier pairs in our sample.
As illustrated in Figure 3, we first compare the climate exposure of the replaced suppliers to
the exposure that their replacements would have had during the ‘initial’ relationship. Second, we
compare ‘new’ and ‘old’ suppliers over the time period after the initial (i.e. during the new) supplier
relationship. For each comparison, we estimate the following linear probability model to study the
effect of increases in climate-risk exposure on the selection of new suppliers:
1(Exposure N ew < Old)sc = β × 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks)st
+ γn(s)t + γn(c)t + θd(s)t + θd(c)t + ϵsc

(6)

where 1(Exposure N ew < Old)sc takes the value of one if the ‘new’ supplier has a lower climate risk
exposure than the ‘old’ supplier, and zero otherwise. 1(Realized > Expected Shocks)st indicates
the exceedance of climate risk expectations at the location of supplier s in the last relationship year
t before termination to identify supplier which were more likely to be terminated due to climate
risk reasons. We include industry- and country-by-year fixed effects (γnt , θct ) for suppliers s and
customers c. Table 12 summarizes the results.
[Insert Table 12 here.]
We find a strong positive effect of climate risk exceedance on the likelihood that replacement
suppliers had a lower ex-post exposure to heat shocks than terminated suppliers during the initial
relationship, as shown in Columns (1) and (2) of Panel 12a and Panel 12b. The likelihood that new
suppliers had a lower heat exposure than old suppliers is 12.1 percentage points higher for suppliers
that were more likely terminated due to climate risk (i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) = 1).
This finding is consistent with the idea that customers choose replacement suppliers which exhibited
lower climate exposure in the past when the perceived climate-risk has changed in the location of
34

the ‘old’ supplier.
At the same time, even if customers disregard climate risks and on average switch to replacement
suppliers in ex-ante similar climate zones, we might find a difference in climate exposure during the
initial relationship, as the ‘old’ supplier by construction experienced a high number of shocks drawn
randomly from the underlying distribution. However, we would expect no difference in climate
exposure between ‘old’ and ‘new’ suppliers after the initial relationship, as both firms in this case
would have similar ex-ante climate expectations. Importantly, we find that a large proportion of the
documented effect remains when we consider the period after the initial relationship ended. As
shown in Columns (3) and (4) of Panel 12a, we find that ‘new’ suppliers were 6 to 10 percentage
points more likely (statistically significant at the 5% and 1% level) to experience a decrease in
actual heat shocks compared to ‘old’ suppliers going forward. This result indicates that customers
on average choose replacement suppliers with an ex-ante different local climate distribution. In
contrast, these findings are inconsistent with a purely statistical effect, under which ‘old’ and ‘new’
suppliers’ climate realizations revert to the mean after switching suppliers.
We further consider long-term heat projections for ‘old’ and ‘new’ suppliers in Columns (5)
and (6).41 We find a small, less precisely estimated positive effect of climate-risk exceedance on
the difference in heat projections between ‘new’ and ‘old’ suppliers. Regarding flood risk in Panels
12c and 12d, we find qualitatively similar results. We document a large difference in ex-post flood
exposure of ‘new’ and ‘old’ suppliers during the initial relationship, but a smaller, less precisely
estimated difference in the period after compared to our results for heat exposure. This result is
potentially due to the fact that floods occur less frequently. Hence, when we consider the period
after which the initial supplier was affected by a flood, the substitution of suppliers with firms
located in areas with less flood risk may only lead to identifiable decreases in exposure after longer
periods of time.
Taken together, our results indicate that climate risk exposure affects not only the termination
but also the formation of new supply-chain relationships, as customers switch from suppliers which
experienced more weather shocks than expected to replacements in less exposed areas. This effect
is more precisely estimated for heat compared to flood events, and weaker when considering heat
We use projections of future heat days between 2040 and 2069 under the RCP 4.5 scenario as modelled by the
Max Planck Institute for Meteorology.
41

35

projections from long-term climate models.

6

Conclusion

This paper studies if firms adjust their supply-chain networks as a result of perceived changes in
their suppliers’ exposure to physical climate risks. To address this question, we combine granular
data on global supply-chain relationships from FactSet Revere with meteorologic records of high
temperatures from the ECMWF, spatial information on floods from the DFO, and daily temperature
projections from the CMIP5. Our final sample includes 5,628 (8,200) supplier (customer) firms
across 92 (74) countries from 2003 to 2017. We document three main insights.
First, we find that the financial performance of suppliers is negatively affected by heat and flooding
incidents, and show that the financial consequences of these shocks propagate to customers through
existing supply chain links. Second, we show that firms adapt their supply-chain organizations
when weather shocks at the locations of their supplier firms become more frequent. Consistent
with models of experience-based Bayesian updating, this effect increases with signal strength and
repetition, cannot be explained by transitory shocks, and is stronger for suppliers in competitive
industries and weaker for closely integrated supply-chain relationships. Third, we document that
customers choose replacement suppliers with lower expected climate risks.
Our findings have potentially important implications. The adaptation efforts of internationally
diversified firms could have meaningful consequences for international economic development. As
developing countries are likely to experience the most pronounced increases in the frequency of
weather shocks, firms in less developed countries might be more likely to be substituted by customers
in favor of suppliers in less vulnerable locations. As a result, the outlined effects could further
economically weaken the areas most vulnerable to climate change. Further, our findings could be
relevant for estimations of the social cost of carbon, as current estimations do not take indirect
negative performance effects of heat and flood events into account.
Taken together, our study contributes to the rapidly growing academic literature on the financial
economics of climate change, and is among the first studies to provide evidence on how firms adapt
to climate change.

36

References
Acemoglu, D. and P. D. Azar (2020). Endogenous production networks. Econometrica 88 (1), 33–82.
Addoum, J. M., D. T. Ng, and A. Ortiz-Bobea (2019). Temperature shocks and industry earnings news.
Working Paper, Available at SSRN 3480695.
Addoum, J. M., D. T. Ng, and A. Ortiz-Bobea (2020). Temperature shocks and establishment sales. The
Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1331–1366.
Alevy, J. E., M. S. Haigh, and J. A. List (2007). Information cascades: Evidence from a field experiment
with financial market professionals. The Journal of Finance 62 (1), 151–180.
Antràs, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017). The margins of global sourcing: Theory and evidence from
us firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2514–64.
Auffhammer, M. (2018). Quantifying economic damages from climate change. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4), 33–52.
Baldauf, M., L. Garlappi, and C. Yannelis (2020). Does climate change affect real estate prices? Only if you
believe in it. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1256–1295.
Banerjee, S., S. Dasgupta, and Y. Kim (2008). Buyer–supplier relationships and the stakeholder theory of
capital structure. Journal of Finance 63 (5), 2507–2552.
Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks in
production networks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1543–1592.
Boehm, C. E., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2019). Input linkages and the transmission of shocks:
Firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake. The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1),
60–75.
Burke, M. and K. Emerick (2016). Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US agriculture. American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3), 106–40.
Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015a). Climate and conflict. Annual Review of Economics 7 (1),
577–617.
Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015b). Global non-linear effect of temperature on economic
production. Nature 527 (7577), 235.
Campello, M. and J. Gao (2017). Customer concentration and loan contract terms. Journal of Financial
Economics 123 (1), 108 – 136.
Carleton, T. A. and S. M. Hsiang (2016). Social and economic impacts of climate. Science 353 (6304).
Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2021). Supply chain disruptions: Evidence
from the great east japan earthquake. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (2), 1255–1321.
Cen, L., E. L. Maydew, L. Zhang, and L. Zuo (2017). Customer–supplier relationships and corporate tax
avoidance. Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2), 377–394.
Chiang, Y.-M., D. Hirshleifer, Y. Qian, and A. E. Sherman (2011). Do investors learn from experience?
evidence from frequent IPO investors. The Review of Financial Studies 24 (5), 1560–1589.
Choi, D., Z. Gao, and W. Jiang (2020). Attention to global warming. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3),
1112–1145.
Cohen, L. and A. Frazzini (2008). Economic links and predictable returns. Journal of Finance 63 (4),
1977–2011.
CRED (2011). EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED international disaster database. Centre for Research on the
Epidemiology of Disasters. Université Catholique de Louvain Brussels, Belgium.
CSSR (2017). Climate science special report. In D. Wuebbles, D. Fahey, K. Hibbard, D. Dokken, B. Stewart,

37

and T. Maycock (Eds.), Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I. U.S. Global Change Research
Program.
Custodio, C., M. A. Ferreira, E. Garcia-Appendini, and A. Lam (2020). Economic costs of climate change.
Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3724940.
Dasgupta, S., K. Zhang, and C. Zhu (2020). Do social connections mitigate hold-up and facilitate cooperation?
evidence from supply chain relationships. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 1–34.
Dass, N., J. R. Kale, and V. Nanda (2015). Trade credit, relationship-specific investment, and product market
power. Review of Finance 19 (5), 1867–1923.
Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2014). What do we learn from the weather? The new climate-economy
literature. Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3), 740–98.
Deryugina, T. (2013). How do people update? The effects of local weather fluctuations on beliefs about
global warming. Climatic change 118 (2), 397–416.
Dessaint, O. and A. Matray (2017). Do managers overreact to salient risks? Evidence from hurricane strikes.
Journal of Financial Economics 126 (1), 97–121.
Du, J., Y. Lu, and Z. Tao (2009). Bi-sourcing in the global economy. Journal of International Economics 77 (2),
215–222.
Fee, C. E., C. J. Hadlock, and S. Thomas (2006). Corporate equity ownership and the governance of product
market relationships. The Journal of Finance 61 (3), 1217–1251.
Fiedler, T., A. J. Pitman, K. Mackenzie, N. Wood, C. Jakob, and S. E. Perkins-Kirkpatrick (2021). Business
risk and the emergence of climate analytics. Nature Climate Change 11 (2), 87–94.
Gervais, A. (2018). Uncertainty, risk aversion and international trade. Journal of International Economics 115,
145–158.
Ginglinger, E. and Q. Moreau (2019). Climate risk and capital structure. Working Paper, Université
Paris-Dauphine.
Graff-Zivin, J., S. M. Hsiang, and M. Neidell (2018). Temperature and human capital in the short and long
run. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 5 (1), 77–105.
Graff-Zivin, J. and M. Neidell (2014). Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for climate
change. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1), 1–26.
Hersbach, H. (2016). The ERA5 atmospheric reanalysis. AGUFM 2016, NG33D–01.
Hertzel, M. G., Z. Li, M. S. Officer, and K. J. Rodgers (2008). Inter-firm linkages and the wealth effects of
financial distress along the supply chain. Journal of Financial Economics 87 (2), 374–387.
Hong, H., F. W. Li, and J. Xu (2019). Climate risks and market efficiency. Journal of Econometrics 208 (1),
265 – 281. Special Issue on Financial Engineering and Risk Management.
Hurrell, J., M. Visbeck, and P. Pirani (2011). Wcrp coupled model intercomparison project-phase 5-CMIP5.
Clivar Exchanges 16 (56).
Ilhan, E., P. Krueger, Z. Sautner, and L. T. Starks (2020). Climate risk disclosure and institutional investors.
Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 19-66, ECGI – Finance Working Paper No. 661/2020.
Kala, N. (2019). Learning, adaptation, and climate uncertainty: Evidence from Indian agriculture. MIT
Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research Working Paper 23.
Kale, J. R. and H. Shahrur (2007). Corporate capital structure and the characteristics of suppliers and
customers. Journal of Financial Economics 83 (2), 321 – 365.
Kelly, D. L., C. D. Kolstad, and G. T. Mitchell (2005). Adjustment costs from environmental change. Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 50 (3), 468–495.
Kolstad, C. D. and F. C. Moore (2020). Estimating the economic impacts of climate change using weather

38

observations. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 14 (1), 1–24.
Krueger, P., Z. Sautner, and L. T. Starks (2020). The importance of climate risks for institutional investors.
The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1067–1111.
Kumar, A., W. Xin, and C. Zhang (2019). Climate sensitivity and predictable returns. Working Paper,
Available at SSRN 3331872.
Lesk, C., P. Rowhani, and N. Ramankutty (2016). Influence of extreme weather disasters on global crop
production. Nature 529 (7584), 84.
Li, F. W., Y. Lin, Z. Jin, and Z. Zhang (2020). Do firms adapt to climate change? Evidence from
establishment-level data. Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573260.
Li, Q., H. Shan, Y. Tang, and V. Yao (2020). Corporate climate risk: Measurements and responses. Working
Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3508497.
Lim, K. (2018). Endogenous production networks and the business cycle. Working Paper.
Lin, C., T. Schmid, and M. S. Weisbach (2020). Climate change and corporate investments: Evidence from
planned power plants. Fisher College of Business Working Paper No. 2019-03-026.
Mishra, A. K. and V. P. Singh (2010). A review of drought concepts. Journal of Hydrology 391 (1-2), 202–216.
Moore, F. C. (2017). Learning, adaptation, and weather in a changing climate. Climate Change Economics 8 (04), 1750010.
Noy, I. (2009). The macroeconomic consequences of disasters. Journal of Development Economics 88 (2),
221–231.
Oberfield, E. (2018). A theory of input–output architecture. Econometrica 86 (2), 559–589.
Pankratz, N., R. Bauer, and J. Derwall (2019). Climate change, firm performance, and investor surprises.
Working Paper, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA).
Pechan, A. and K. Eisenack (2014). The impact of heat waves on electricity spot markets. Energy Economics 43,
63–71.
Phua, K., T. M. Tham, and C. Wei (2018). Are overconfident CEOs better leaders? Evidence from stakeholder
commitments. Journal of Financial Economics 127 (3), 519–545.
PWC (2015). CEO pulse on climate change. Available at: http://download.pwc.com/gx/ceo-pulse/
climatechange/index.htm.
Schlenker, W. and C. A. Taylor (2019). Market expectations about climate change. Working Paper 25554,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sepannen, O., W. Fisk, and Q. H. Lei (2006). Effect of temperature on task performance in office environment.
Working Paper, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Somanathan, E., R. Somanathan, A. Sudarshan, and M. Tewari (2015). The impact of temperature on
productivity and labor supply: Evidence from Indian manufacturing. Working Paper.
Strömberg, D. (2007). Natural disasters, economic development, and humanitarian aid. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21 (3), 199–222.
Taylor, K. E., R. J. Stouffer, and G. A. Meehl (2012). An overview of CMIP5 and the experiment design.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93 (4), 485–498.
Xiang, J., P. Bi, D. Pisaniello, and A. Hansen (2014). Health impacts of workplace heat exposure: an
epidemiological review. Industrial Health 52 (2), 91–101.
Zhang, P., O. Deschenes, K. Meng, and J. Zhang (2018). Temperature effects on productivity and factor
reallocation: Evidence from a half million chinese manufacturing plants. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 88, 1–17.

39

Tables and Figures
Figure 1: Geographic Distribution of Customers and Suppliers

(a) Distribution of Customers

(b) Distribution of Suppliers

This figure shows the geographical distribution of the customers and suppliers in our sample. Supplychain relationships and firm locations are obtained from FactSet Revere and FactSet Fundamentals,
respectively. The corresponding Table 1 reports the number of customers by geographic regions.
40

Verbal Description This figure shows two maps of the world to illustrate the geographical
distribution of the customers and suppliers the sample. Panel (a) shows a map with the country
boundaries and red dots marking the location of supplier headquarters. Panel (b) shows the same
map with blue dots marking the location of customer locations. Supply-chain relationships and firm
locations are obtained from FactSet Revere and FactSet Fundamentals, respectively. The sample
is global and both suppliers and customers are distributed over a large number of countries, with
stronger concentration in the Eastern United States, along the West Coast of the Unites States, in
Northern and Western Europe, in East Asia, and Japan. The corresponding Table 1 reports the
exact number of suppliers and customers by geographic regions.

41

Figure 2: Variable Construction — Expected vs. Realized Climate Risk
Number of Weather Shocks per Year

Expected Exposure

Realized Exposure

3
2
1

t
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

weather shocks/year = 1

2

3

4

5

weather shocks/year > 1

Start Supply-Chain Relationship

This figure illustrates the construction of our main measure capturing the discrepancy between
realized and expected climate risk based on the exposure of a hypothetical supplier to heat and flood
days over time, i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t). This indicator variable is constructed by
first estimating the historical prior as the average number of weather shocks per year in the supplier
location over a benchmark period of five years before the establishment of a given supplier-customer
relationship. In robustness tests we use alternative estimation horizons of seven, ten, and fifteen years.
1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) then takes the value of one in a given year t, if the difference
between the realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer
relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of shocks, and zero otherwise. For example,
in the case illustrated above, the average number of weather shocks over the five-year benchmark
period before the beginning of the supply-chain relationship is one, i.e. climate shocks/year = 1
(illustrated in light blue). In year 1, the realized number of shocks is 1 and hence does not exceed the
expected value from the benchmark period. Similarly, in year 3 the number of shocks is 2, bringing
the average number of annual shocks since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship to 1 (i.e.
(1 + 0 + 2)/3 = 1), which also does not exceed the prior (highlighted in dark blue). In years 4 and 5,
the average number of realized annual shocks increases above 1 and exceeds the expected value from
the benchmark period (highlighted in red). 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) would be zero in
t = 1 through t = 3, and one in t = 4 and t = 5 in the illustrated example.

42

Verbal Description This figure illustrates an example of the construction of our main measure.
It captures the discrepancy between realized and expected climate risk based on the exposure of a
hypothetical supplier to heat and flood days over time, i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t).
This indicator variable is constructed by first estimating the historical prior as the average number
of weather shocks per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of five years before
the establishment of a given supplier-customer relationship. In robustness tests we use alternative
estimation horizons of seven, ten, and fifteen years. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) then takes
the value of one in a given year t, if the difference between the realized number of climate shocks per
year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected
number of shocks, and zero otherwise.
In the figure, the y-axis shows the number of weather shocks per year at the location of a
hypothetical supplier firm. The x-axis shows the timeline of a customer relationship for this
supplier, starting five years before the supply chain relationship (t=-5) and ending five years
into the relationship (t=5). In the example in the figure, the average number of weather shocks
over the five-year benchmark period before the beginning of the supply-chain relationship [-5,0]
is one on average, i.e. climate shocks/year = 1 (illustrated in light blue), with 1 shock in t=-5,
two shocks in t=-3, and 1 shock in t=-2 and t=-1, respectively. In the benchmark period, the
customer-supplier relationship is not active yet, and the customer assesses the average annual
exposure of the supplier, Expected Shocks. In the first year of the relationship t=1, the realized
number of shocks is 1. Hence, the expected value of shocks from the benchmark period is not
exceeded, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) would be zero in t = 1. There are no shocks in
t=2. In t=3, the number of shocks is 2, increasing the average number of annual shocks since
the beginning of the supply-chain relationship to 1 (i.e. (1 + 0 + 2)/3 = 1), which also does not
exceed the prior (highlighted in dark blue). Therefore, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) would
still be zero in t = 3. In t=4 and t=5, 3 and 4 shocks occur. The average number of annual shocks
increases above 1 and now exceeds the expected value from the benchmark period (highlighted in
red). 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) switches to 1 in t = 4 and t = 5.

43

Figure 3: Variable Construction – Exposure of Replaced and Replacement Suppliers
Number of Weather Shocks, Replaced Supplier

3
2
1
Number of Weather Shocks, Replacment Supplier

3
2
1

1984

...

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

...

2017

t

estimation period 1984 − 2017
estimation period during

Supply-Chain Rel. Start

estimation period af ter

Supply-Chain Rel. End

This figure illustrates the construction of the comparison of the climate exposure of replaced and
replacement suppliers (Table 12) based on an example of a hypothetical replaced supplier and the
replacement. We compare the heat and flood days of old and new suppliers based on three time
periods. First, we estimate and compare the climate risk exposure of the replaced and replacement
supplier based on the years (in dark grey) during which the initial supply-chain relationship was
active. Second, we compare the exposure of both suppliers after the initial supplier has been replaced
(in light grey). Third, we compare the exposure of both suppliers according to long-term forecasts
from scientific climate change models.

44

Verbal Description This figure illustrates the construction of the comparison of the climate
exposure of replaced and replacement suppliers (Table 12) based on an example of a hypothetical
replaced supplier and the replacement. The figure has two panels. In the first panel, the y-axis
shows the number of weather shocks (annual heat and flood days) for the replaced supplier. In the
second panel, the y-axis shows the number of shocks for the new replacement supplier. The x-axis
tracks the timeline of the sample from 1984 to 2017. We compare the heat and flood days of old and
new suppliers based on three time periods. First, we estimate and compare the climate risk exposure
of the replaced and replacement supplier based on the years during which the initial, hypothetical
supply-chain relationship was active. For the example, we choose a relationship lasting from 2003
to 2007. In both panels, the region of these years is shaded in in dark grey. The start (t=2003)
is labeled ’supply-chain relationship start’, the end (t=2008) is labeled ’supply-chain relationship
end’, and the period is named ’estimation period during’. In the first panel of the replaced supplier,
the number if shocks is 1 in 2003, 3 in 2005, 1 in 2006, and 2 in 2007. In the second panel of the
replacement supplier, the average number of shocks is lower, with one shock occurring in 2003,
2 shocks in 2005, and 1 shock in 2007. Second, we compare the exposure of both suppliers after
the initial supplier has been replaced from 2008 to 2017. The region of shocks in these years is
shaded (in light grey). The start(t=2008) is labeled ’supply-chain relationship end’, and the period
is named ’estimation period after’. In this period and in the first panel of the replaced supplier,
the number if shocks is 1 in 2008, 3 in 2010, 2 in 2011, 1 in 2012, 1 in 2013, and 4 in 2016. In the
second panel of the replacement supplier, the average number of shocks is lower, with one shock
occurring in 2012. Third, we compare the exposure of both suppliers during the full sample period
from 1984 to 2017, labeled ’estimation period 1984 - 2017’.

45

Figure 4: Direct Effects of Weather Shocks By Firm Geographic Concentration

(a) Effect of Heat Days, Supplier Geographic Concentration

(b) Effect of Flood Days, Supplier Geographic Concentration

This figure shows the effect of heat days and flood days on suppliers’ revenues (Rev) and operating
income (OpI), both scaled by firm assets lagged by one year with 95% confidence intervals. The
effects are estimated as outlined in Equation 1 for subsamples of the data based on the percentage
of firms within 30km of the supplier’s headquarters. The main variable of interest is the sum of
days on which heat or flooding occurred during the financial quarters t − 3 to t. The number
of firms by concentration is 3,514 (0-25%), 2,412 (25-50%), 1,861 (50-75%), 484 (75-100%). We
exclude firms in the financial industry. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects,
industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, controls for country-specific linear trends, and interaction
terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm
characteristics, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) (BS2016).

46

Verbal Description This figure shows the effect of heat days and flood days on suppliers’ revenues
and operating income by geographic concentration. The figure consists of four individual charts. The
effect of heat days on revenues over assets is shown in the top left and the effect of heat on operating
income over assets is shown in the top right. The effect of floods on revenues is shown in the bottom
left and the effect of floods on operating income is shown in the bottom right. All individual charts
show four different estimations for subsamples of the data based on the percentage of firms’ locations
obtained from Orbis that lie within 30km of the supplier’s headquarters. The first susample consists
of firms with 0-25% of locations concentrated within a 30km radius of the headquarters. The second
subsample contains firms with 25-50%, the third contains firms with 50-75%, and the fourth contains
firms with 75-100% concentration. The number of firms by concentration is 3,514 (0-25%), 2,412
(25-50%), 1,861 (50-75%), 484 (75-100%). For each of the four subsamples, the effects are estimated
as outlined in Equation 1. The individual charts plot the coefficient of the sum of days on which
heat or flooding occurred during the financial quarters t − 3 to t together with 95% confidence
intervals. We exclude firms in the financial industry. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter
fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, controls for country-specific linear trends,
and interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to
control for firm characteristics, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) (BS2016).
The charts show the effects on the outcomes, revenues and operating income over assets, on
the y-axis, and the coefficients ordered by concentration category along the x-axis. First, on the
top left, we find similar coefficients sizes for the first three concentration categories (approximately
-0.01 for 0-25%, 25-50%, and 50-75%) and a more negative effect for the most concentrated firms
(75-100%) (approximately -0.023). The effect for the first category is significant, and insignificant
for all other categories with the confidence interval just crossing the x-axis. Second, on the top right,
the effect of heat days on operating income becomes larger with firm concentration in absolute
terms (0-25%: ≈ -0.002, 25-50%: ≈ -0.0025, 50-75%: ≈ -0.0025, 75-100%: ≈ -0.006). All effects are
insignificant with the confidence interval just crossing the x-axis. Third, on the bottom left, the
effects of floods on revenues over assets also become more negative with firm concentration (0-25%:
≈ -0.005, 25-50%: ≈ -0.02, 50-75: ≈ -0.03, 75-100: ≈ -0.06). The effects for the three categories with
concentrations of 25% and higher are significantly different from zero. Fourth, on the bottom right,
the effects of flood days on operating income become more negative with concentration except for
the most concentrated category (0-25%: ≈ 0, 25-50%: ≈ -0.005, 50-75: ≈ -0.009, 75-100: ≈ -0.008).
Except for the estimation on the subsample of firms with 0-25% concentration, the coefficients are
significantly different from zero.

47

Figure 5: Dynamics Plots – Weather Shocks to Suppliers and Customer Performance
.02

Cus OpI (t)

.01

0

-.01

-.02

-.03
-4

-3

-2

-1

+0

+1

+2

+3

+4

+5

+6

+5

+6

Quarter (t) relative to heatwave

(a) Customer operating income around supplier heatwaves
.02

.01

Cus OpI (t)

0

-.01

-.02

-.03

-.04
-4

-3

-2

-1

+0

+1

+2

+3

+4

Quarter (t) relative to flood

(b) Customer operating income around supplier floods

This figure shows the effect of heatwaves and floods at the supplier firm locations on customer
operating income in the 11 quarters around weather shocks on suppliers. Specifically, the plots in
Fig. 5a and 5b show the coefficient estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for βt from
Equation (2) with t ∈ [−4; 6] for heatwaves and floods, respectively. As in Appendix Table A3, we use
indicator variables of heatwaves and floods in this figure. Each model includes customer-by-quarter
fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter (SIC 2 digit) fixed effects, country-specific time-trends,
and size, age, and profitability by time fixed effects as in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016).

48

Verbal Description This figure shows the effect of heatwaves and floods at the supplier firm
locations on customer operating income in the 11 quarters around weather shocks on suppliers.
It consists of two parts, first the plot of the effects of heat on operating income in Figure 5a and
second the plot of the effects of floods on operating income in Figure 5b. Both subfigures show
the coefficient estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for βt from Equation (2) with
t ∈ [−4; 6] for heatwaves and floods, respectively. The y-axis plots the effect size, the x-axis shows
the coefficients for each of the lags for t ∈ [−4; 6]. As in Appendix Table A3, we use indicator
variables of heatwaves and floods in this figure. Each model includes customer-by-quarter fixed
effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter (SIC 2 digit) fixed effects, country-specific time-trends, and size,
age, and profitability by time fixed effects as in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016).
In Figure 5a, the effect of heat on operating income is insignificant from zero up until t=0 and
in t=3, t=4, and t=6. In t=1, t=2, and t=3, the effects are negative and significantly different from
zero (t=1 ≈ -0.0125, t=2 ≈ -0.01, t=5 ≈ -0.011). In Figure 5b, the effects are insignificant except
for t=0 (≈ -0.019), t=1 (≈ -0.025), and t=2 (≈ -0.02).

49

Figure 6: Identifying Variation in Realized vs. Expected Climate Risk

(a) Identifying Variation, Realized-Expected Heat Days

(b) Identifying Variation, Realized-Expected Flood Days

This figure shows the distribution of our main measure of interest, (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t),
capturing the discrepancy between realized and expected climate risk both before and during the
supply-chain relationship. The construction of the variable is illustrated in Figure 2. First, we
estimate the historical prior as the expected number of heat and flood days per year in the supplier
location over a benchmark period of ten (in robustness tests seven, ten, and fifteen) years before the
establishment of a given supplier-customer relationship. Then we calculate the difference between
this prior and the average realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the
supplier-customer relationship. Figure 6a shows the distribution of the absolute deviation of realized
and expected exposure to heat (left) as well as the residual after absorbing customer industry-year,
supplier industry-year, and customer country-supplier country-year fixed effects (right). Figure 6b
presents the corresponding distributions for floods.

50

Verbal Description This figure shows the distribution of the variation underlying our main
measure of interest, (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t). The construction of the variable is
illustrated in Figure 2. It shows the difference between the realized heat days and flood days during
the relationship and the expected climate shocks before the supply-chain relationship. We estimate
the expected number of heat and flood days per year in the supplier location over a benchmark
period of ten (in robustness tests seven, ten, and fifteen) years before the establishment of a given
supplier-customer relationship. It consists of four charts. In each of the four charts, the y-axis shows
the density, the x-axis shows the difference between realized and expected heat or flood days. The
top left shows the density for the difference of realized and expected heat days, and the bottom left
shows the density for the difference of realized and expected flood days. The top right shows the
density of the residual variation of the difference of realized and expected heat days after absorbing
customer industry-year, supplier industry-year, and customer country-supplier country-year fixed
effects. The bottom right shows the density for the residual of the difference of realized and expected
flood days.
First, the distribution of realized and expected heat days on the top left is close to symmetric.
It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.14, but somewhat more dense and skewed
to the right. The difference in realized and expected days ranges from ≈-20 to ≈30 days per year.
Second, the distribution of the residual of realized and expected heat days on the top left is even
more symmetric. It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.11, but somewhat more
dense left of the center. It is slightly skewed to the right, with the difference in realized and expected
days ranging from ≈-20 to ≈25 days per year. Third, the distribution of realized and expected flood
days on the bottom left is close to symmetric. It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density
of ≈0.2, but more dense left of the center and skewed to the right. The difference in realized and
expected days ranges from ≈-10 to ≈22 days per year. Fourth, the distribution of the residual of
realized and expected flood days on the bottom right is also close to symmetric. It is unimodal and
peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.21. It is more dense left of the center and skewed to the right.
The difference in realized and expected days ranges from ≈-10 to ≈17 days per year.

51

Table 1: Sample Composition
Notes. This table shows the industry and geographic distribution of customers and suppliers in our sample. We retain
supplier and customer firms from the FactSet Revere universe of supply chain relationships if more than 50% of the
supplier’s assets are in their home country and at least one complete record of financial performance data and climate
hazard records is available during the period from 2003 to 2017. We drop firms that operate in the financial industry
(one-digit SIC code of 6). The number of observations refers to unique firms.

Customers
SIC Code
Manufacturing (3)
Manufacturing (2)
Transport/Utilities
Retail/Wholesale
Services (7)
Mining/Construction
Services (8)
Administration
Agriculture
Total

Suppliers

No.

%

2,310
1,500
1,175
1,070
931
807
337
36
34
8,200

28.2
18.3
14.3
13.0
11.4
9.8
4.1
0.4
0.4
100.0

SIC Code
Manufacturing (3)
Manufacturing (2)
Services (7)
Transport/Utilities
Mining/Construction
Retail/Wholesale
Services (8)
Agriculture
Administration
Total

Customers
Asia
Americas
Europe
Oceania
Africa
Total

%
30.1
18.7
14.7
12.3
11.5
7.0
4.9
0.5
0.3
100.0

Suppliers
No.

%

3,200
2,981
1,666
250
103
8,200

39.0
36.4
20.3
3.0
1.3
100.0

UN Regions (long)

No.
1,693
1,054
825
693
646
394
278
26
19
5,628

Asia
Americas
Europe
Oceania
Africa
Total

Customers
UN Regions (short)
Northern America
Eastern Asia
Northern Europe
Western Europe
South-Eastern Asia
Western Asia
South America
Southern Asia
Australia and New Zealand
Southern Europe
Eastern Europe
Central America
Southern Africa
Northern Africa
Eastern Africa
Central Asia
Western Africa
Caribbean
Middle Africa
Total

No.

%

2,268
2,185
978
148
49
5,628

40.3
38.8
17.4
2.6
0.9
100.0

UN Regions (long)

Suppliers
No.

%

2,633
2,140
703
589
496
292
282
267
250
192
182
65
61
27
9
5
5
1
1
8,200

32.1
26.1
8.6
7.2
6.0
3.6
3.4
3.3
3.0
2.3
2.2
0.8
0.7
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
100.0

UN Regions (short)
Northern America
Eastern Asia
Northern Europe
Western Europe
South-Eastern Asia
South America
Western Asia
Australia and New Zealand
Eastern Europe
Southern Europe
Southern Asia
Central America
Southern Africa
Northern Africa
Eastern Africa
Western Africa
Central Asia
Total

52

No.

%

1,944
1,647
401
332
323
204
192
148
128
117
104
37
34
7
4
4
2
5,628

34.5
29.3
7.1
5.9
5.7
3.6
3.4
2.6
2.3
2.1
1.8
0.7
0.6
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
100.0

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Notes. This table presents summary statistics of the suppliers (Panel A), customers (Panel B), customer-supplier
pairs (Panel C), and weather shocks (Panel D) in our sample. The sample period is 2003 to 2017. The number
of observations refers to unique firm-year-quarters in Panels A, B, and D and pair-year-quarters in Panel C. Data
on market capitalization (“MCap”), book value of assets (“Assets”), revenue, operating income (“Op. Income”),
asset tangibility (“Tangibility”), inventory, operating margin, accounts payable (“AccPay”)), and cost of goods sold
(“COGS”) are from Worldscope, all measured at the quarterly frequency, and scaled by one-year lagged total assets.
“Tangibility” is the ratio of property, plants, and equipment (PPE) to total assets. “% of locations <30km from
HQ” refers to the number of company facilities within 30km of the headquarter as obtained from Orbis. “Industry
Competitiveness” is the number of firms (in thousands) per SIC 2-digit industry. “Asset4 ESG Score” is the firm’s
ESG score from the Thomson Reuters Asset4 database. “BEA Input-Ind. Concentration” is the Herfindahl-Hirschman
Index (HHI) of inputs per industry from the BEA Input-Output matrices. “Supplier Diversification” is the ratio of
the number of suppliers to unique supplier SIC 2-digit industries. “Sales Correlation” is the running correlation of
supplier and customer sales over the previous 9 quarters. The number of suppliers and percentage of sales (COGS)
are from Factset Revere. “Heatwave 30°C/7 (0/1)” indicates the occurrence of a heatwave as seven consecutive days
above 30°C. The sample excludes observations with missing records on revenue and/or operating income, missing
lagged climate variables, as well as records of firms that operate in the financial industry (SIC 1-digit code of 6).

Revenue / Assets (%)
Op. Income / Assets (%)
% Locations <30km from HQ
Asset Tangibility (%)
Ind. Vulnerability (%)
Ind. Competitiveness

N

Mean

StDev

p25

Median

p75

226085
225085
222031
192319
222031
193251

26.884
1.274
29.598
22.291
5.433
1.201

20.141
4.397
24.568
20.564
22.666
0.807

13.125
0.201
7.755
6.544
0.000
0.489

22.392
1.583
22.222
15.404
0.000
1.048

34.926
3.172
50.000
32.117
0.000
1.923

(a) Unique Supplier-Year-Quarter Observations

Revenue / Assets (%)
Op. Income / Assets (%)
BEA Input-Ind. Concentration
Inventory / Assets (%)
Supplier Diversification
Asset4 ESG Score
Op. Margin (%)
No. Suppliers / Assets (B. USD)
AccPay / Assets (%)
COGS / Assets (%)

N

Mean

StDev

p25

Median

p75

125359
125359
55111
114785
124023
65814
124605
123944
103663
114206

25.757
1.802
0.051
10.688
1.060
50.621
6.645
3.176
10.247
17.564

20.339
3.132
0.101
11.122
0.747
19.509
24.848
6.901
9.239
16.129

11.788
0.472
0.011
1.611
0.500
35.102
2.850
0.407
3.714
6.094

21.137
1.665
0.022
7.937
1.000
50.475
8.260
1.025
7.498
13.199

33.914
3.203
0.054
15.936
1.250
66.083
15.940
2.733
13.738
23.432

(b) Unique Customer-Year-Quarter Observations

Sales Correlation (%)
Relationship Age (Years)
Pct. Sales Sup (%)
Pct. COGS Cus (%)
Sales Sup to Cus (M. USD)
MCap Cus / MCap Sup
Assets Cus / Assets Sup

N

Mean

StDev

p25

Median

p75

500046
746432
72651
60828
62647
577941
592222

16.116
2.431
18.571
2.605
265.669
317.660
490.463

44.091
2.820
17.091
7.331
670.965
1110.934
1758.379

-16.700
0.000
10.000
0.105
13.190
2.972
4.556

18.600
1.000
13.900
0.413
51.585
19.372
27.911

51.300
3.000
21.600
1.695
181.905
118.769
175.762

(c) Unique Firm-Pair-Year-Quarter Observations

53

Heat Days 30° C
Heat Days (within-location)
Heat Days (conditional)
Heatwave 30° C/7 (0/1)
Heatwaves Count
Average Temperature
Flood Days
Flood Days (conditional)
Flood (0/1)
Flood Count
EMDAT Heat Days
EMDAT Heatwave (0/1)
EMDAT Flood (0/1)
EMDAT Flood Days

N

Mean

StDev

p25

Median

p75

202439
202439
102526
202439
202439
202439
202439
13113
202439
202439
202439
202439
202439
202439

14.091
-0.000
27.823
0.243
0.503
19.292
0.696
10.738
0.065
0.064
2.060
0.124
0.442
7.345

23.624
16.170
26.830
0.429
1.048
5.591
3.954
11.554
0.246
0.262
7.848
0.329
0.497
13.617

0.000
-8.967
5.000
0.000
0.000
15.016
0.000
4.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1.000
-1.128
18.000
0.000
0.000
19.197
0.000
6.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

18.000
3.571
46.000
0.000
0.000
22.325
0.000
12.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
9.000

(d) Supplier Exposure to Weather Shocks

54

Table 3: Physical Climate Risk and Supplier Firm Performance
Notes. This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the sample supplier firms on their revenues (Rev) and
operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets lagged by one year. Heat Days (t) and F lood Days (t) indicate the number of days on which heat and floods
occur during the financial quarter t and the three preceding quarters (t − 3 to t − 1). The number of observations refers to supplier firm year-quarters, and
the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We exclude firms in the financial industry as well as firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the
company headquarter. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects to control for time invariant firm characteristics and firm-specific seasonal effects,
industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, as well as controls for country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles
of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

(a) Heat

Heat Days (t)

(b) Floods

Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

(1)

(3)

(2)

(4)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.016
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)
-0.015∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.011∗∗
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.015
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.014∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.011∗∗
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.003
(0.001)
-0.002∗
(0.001)
-0.003∗∗
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.003
(0.001)
-0.003∗
(0.001)
-0.003∗∗
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7626
202,438
5,628

0.7668
202,438
5,628

0.6258
202,438
5,628

0.6311
202,438
5,628

Heat Days (t-1)

55

Heat Days (t-2)
Heat Days (t-3)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗

∗∗

Flood Days (t)

Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

(1)

(3)

(2)

(4)

∗∗∗

-0.020
(0.007)
-0.023∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.023∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.008)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

∗∗∗

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.023
(0.007)
-0.025∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.024∗∗∗
(0.006)
-0.009
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

∗∗∗

-0.006
(0.002)
-0.006∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.004∗∗
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.006∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.006∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.004∗∗
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7626
202,438
5,628

0.7668
202,438
5,628

0.6258
202,438
5,628

0.6311
202,438
5,628

Flood Days (t-1)
Flood Days (t-2)
Flood Days (t-3)

Table 4: Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks
Notes. This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the supplier firms on their customers’ revenues (Rev)
and operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets lagged by one year. Heat Days (t) and F lood Days (t) indicate the number of days on which heat (in excess of
30 degrees Celsius) and floods occurred during the financial quarter t and the three preceding quarters across all supplier firms of a given customer. The number of
observations refers to customer firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We exclude customer and supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier
firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the headquarters, and customer-supplier pairs with headquarters located within 500 kilometers of
each other. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, and country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and
(4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE),
following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

(a) Heat

(b) Floods

Cus Rev (t)
(1)
Sup Heat Days (t-0)

Cus OpI (t)

(2)

(3)

Cus Rev (t)

(4)

(1)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0012
(0.000)
-0.0017∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0009∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0010∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0012
(0.000)
-0.0019∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0011∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0013∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0002
(0.000)
-0.0003∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0001∗
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0001
(0.000)
-0.0003∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0001∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

123700
.884

123700
.886

123700
.707

123700
.711

Sup Heat Days (t-1)

56

Sup Heat Days (t-2)
Sup Heat Days (t-3)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗

Sup Flood Days (t-0)

Cus OpI (t)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0069
(0.001)
-0.0056∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0059∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0040∗∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0066
(0.001)
-0.0055∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0061∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0047∗∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0014
(0.000)
-0.0011∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0013∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0007∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0012∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0010∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0012∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0006∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

123700
.884

123700
.886

123700
.707

123700
.711

Sup Flood Days (t-1)
Sup Flood Days (t-2)
Sup Flood Days (t-3)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

Table 5: Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks – Cross Section
Notes. This table presents OLS regression estimates on cross-sectional differences in the impact of heat and flooding
at the location of the suppliers on customer performance. The dependent variable in both panels is customer operating
income, scaled by one-year lagged assets. For easier readability, all dependent variables are scaled by multiplying with
100. Heat Days (t, t − 3) (Panel 5a) and F lood Days (t, t − 3) (Panel 5b) measures the total number of heat and
flood days at all suppliers of a given customer during the contemporaneous and previous three quarters. The data is
organized at the customer-year-quarter level and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We apply similar data filters as in
Table 4. “Sup Tangibility” is the ratio of property, plants, and equipment (PPE) to total assets of the supplier. “Sup
Ind Vulnerability” takes the value of one for a given supplier if the firm is in the agriculture, mining, or construction
sector (SIC 1-digit of 1, 2, or 3). “Sup Ind. Competitiveness” is the number of firms (in thousands) per SIC 2-digit
industry. “Input-Ind. Concentration” is the HHI of inputs per industry from the BEA Input-Output matrices. “Sup
Diversification” is the ratio of the number of suppliers to unique supplier SIC 2-digit industries. “Sales Correlation” is
the running correlation of supplier and customer sales over the previous 9 quarters. “Relationship Length” is the
time in years since the beginning of the relationship for the current period t. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal
quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, for country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and
(4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to
control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered at
the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Cus OpI (t)
Heat Days (t,t-3)
Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility
Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0067
(0.012)
-0.0005
(0.000)

-0.0015
(0.006)

-0.0439∗∗∗
(0.008)

0.0000
(0.007)

-0.0290∗∗∗
(0.006)

-0.0182∗
(0.011)

-0.0206∗∗∗
(0.005)

-0.0331∗∗∗
(0.006)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.0012∗∗∗
(0.000)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc.

0.0213∗∗∗
(0.007)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory

-0.0569∗∗∗
(0.020)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers.

0.0013∗∗∗
(0.000)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr.

0.0009
(0.005)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Rel. Length
Sup Tangibility
Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.1110
(0.137)

Sup-Ind Comp.

0.2369∗∗
(0.117)

Cus Inventory

-7.2028
(4.423)

1.0956∗
(0.597)

Sup Divers.
Sales Corr.

-10.9024∗∗∗
(3.939)

Rel. Length
Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE
Observations
R2

-0.0000
(0.000)

-0.0817∗
(0.048)

0.0051∗∗∗
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.2317
(1.374)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

117039
0.709

123700
0.711

102762
0.714

54188
0.718

114095
0.709

122162
0.711

93025
0.713

123700
0.711

(a) Heat

57

Cus OpI (t)
(1)
Flood Days (t,t-3)
Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility
Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.0145
(0.055)
-0.0040∗∗
(0.002)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp.

(2)

(3)

-0.0262
(0.030)

-0.2379∗∗∗

-0.0043∗∗∗
(0.001)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc.

(0.060)

0.1385∗∗∗
(0.048)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory

(4)

(5)

-0.0361
(0.045)

-0.1815∗∗∗

-0.1513
(0.126)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers.

(0.031)

0.0093∗∗∗
(0.002)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr.

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.1034
(0.069)

-0.0650∗∗

-0.2289∗∗∗
(0.052)

0.0092
(0.032)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Rel. Length
Sup Tangibility
Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.0753
(0.131)

Sup-Ind Comp.

0.0921
(0.112)

Cus Inventory

-5.4896
(4.325)

1.2976∗∗
(0.584)

Sup Divers.
Sales Corr.

-12.3944∗∗∗
(3.786)

Rel. Length
Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE
Observations
R2

(0.028)

-0.0016∗
(0.001)

-0.0668
(0.045)

0.0428∗∗∗
(0.016)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.7714
(1.355)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

117039
0.709

123700
0.711

102762
0.713

54188
0.718

114095
0.709

122162
0.710

93025
0.713

123700
0.711

(b) Floods

58

Table 6: Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks – Other Outcomes
Notes. This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the suppliers
on several customer firm-level outcomes. The dependent variables in both Panels 6a and 6b are the customer operating
margin, number of suppliers, accounts receivables, cost of goods sold, and inventory in quarter t in columns (1) through
(5), respectively, all scaled by one-year lagged total assets. The data is organized at the customer-year-quarter level.
The independent variables capturing the number of heat days and flood days across the suppliers of a given customer
in quarters t to t − 3, data filters, as well as fixed effects specifications are similar to Table 4. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

(1)
Op. Margin (t)

(2)
No. Suppliers (t)

(3)
AccPay(t)

(4)
COGS (t)

(5)
Inventory (t)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0005
(0.000)
-0.0010∗
(0.001)
-0.0002
(0.001)
-0.0007
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0003∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.0003∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.0003∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.0005∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0005∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0005∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0001
(0.000)
-0.0001
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0007∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0014∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0007∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0008∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0002
(0.000)
-0.0005∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0002
(0.000)
-0.0003∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

122947
.745

122070
.912

101949
.887

112582
.913

111637
.936

Sup Heat Days (t-0)
Sup Heat Days (t-1)
Sup Heat Days (t-2)
Sup Heat Days (t-3)

(a) Heat

Sup Flood Days (t-0)
Sup Flood Days (t-1)
Sup Flood Days (t-2)
Sup Flood Days (t-3)
Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE
Observations
R2

(1)
Op. Margin (t)

(2)
No. Suppliers (t)

(3)
AccPay(t)

(4)
COGS (t)

(5)
Inventory (t)

-0.0034∗
(0.002)
-0.0046∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.0032∗
(0.002)
-0.0042∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0010∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.0010∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.0011∗∗∗
(0.000)
0.0010∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0013∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0013∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0014∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0001
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0039∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0036∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0043∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0025∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0009∗
(0.001)
-0.0014∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0011∗
(0.001)
-0.0012∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

122947
.745

122070
.912

101949
.887

112582
.913

111637
.936

(b) Floods

59

Table 7: Expected vs. Realized Climate Risk and Relationship Termination
Notes. This table presents linear probability model (Panel 7a) and logit (Panel 7b) estimates on the effect of
1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) on the likelihood of supply-chain relationships to end. This measure takes a value
of one in year t if the difference between the realized number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of
the supply-chain relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of heat and flood days, and zero otherwise.
The construction is illustrated in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level. The
dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after
the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or supplier firms in the financial industry,
supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from the headquarters, and pairs with less than
500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests. The regressions include year fixed effects, supplier
and customer-industry-by-year, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated.
Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

OLS - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
(1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays

(2)

(3)

Observations
R2

(5)

(6)

0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.010∗∗∗
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

126205
0.320

126205
0.380

0.004
(0.002)

0.009
(0.002)

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.015∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
No
No
No

126205
0.313

126205
0.320

126205
0.380

126205
0.314

∗

∗∗∗

1Realized > Expected F loodDays
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE

(4)

0.005
(0.002)
∗∗

(a) Linear Probability: Expected > Realized Exposure to Heat or Floods
Logit - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays (t)
1Realized > Expected F loodDays (t)
Year FE
Cus Ind-Year-Qtr FE
Sup Ind-Year-Qtr FE
Cus Country-Sup Country-Year FE
Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.050
(0.016)

0.061
(0.017)

0.078
(0.017)

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

106293

102784

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

(4)

(5)

(6)

No
No
No
Yes

0.087∗∗∗
(0.018)
Yes
No
No
No

0.111∗∗∗
(0.018)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.079∗∗∗
(0.019)
No
No
No
Yes

106293

106293

102784

106293

∗∗∗

(b) Logit Regression: Realized − Expected Exposure to Heat or Floods

60

Table 8: Strength of the Signal – Expected vs. Realized Climate Risk
Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the effect of weather shock exceedance, i.e.
1 (Realized > Expected Shocks), on supply-chain relationship termination, taking into account how often realized
heat and flood days have exceeded expectations (Panel 8a) as well as the magnitude of the deviation of realization
and expectation (Panel 8b). The construction of the measure is shown in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at the
supplier-customer pair-year level. The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given
supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or
supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from
the headquarters, and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests. The
regressions include supplier and customer-industry-by-year, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year
fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays=1
1Realized > Expected HeatDays=2
1Realized > Expected HeatDays=3
1Realized > Expected HeatDays=4
1Realized > Expected HeatDays=5

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.020∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.076∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.051∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.059∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.008∗∗
(0.004)

-0.021∗∗∗
(0.002)
0.075∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.049∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.055∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.008∗∗
(0.004)

-0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.082∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.057∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.045∗∗∗
(0.006)
0.009∗∗
(0.004)

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.020∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.041∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.023∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.046∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.004)
Yes
No
No
No

0.019∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.039∗∗∗
(0.004)
0.022∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.045∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.000
(0.004)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.016∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.042∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)
0.021∗∗∗
(0.007)
-0.001
(0.004)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

126205
0.319

126205
0.326

126205
0.384

126205
0.314

126205
0.321

126205
0.380

1Realized > Expected F loodDays=1
1Realized > Expected F loodDays=2
1Realized > Expected F loodDays=3
1Realized > Expected F loodDays=4
1Realized > Expected F loodDays=5
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
R2

(a) Functional Form: Effect of Realized > Expected Exposure on Relationship Termination

61

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
(1)
Realized − Expected HeatDays(t)

(2)

(3)

(0.000)

0.0001
(0.000)

0.0003∗∗

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

120805
0.312

120805
0.319

0.0003∗∗

(4)

(5)

(6)

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0017∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
No
No
No

0.0017∗∗∗
(0.000)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.0005∗
(0.000)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

120805
0.381

120805
0.312

120805
0.319

120805
0.381

(0.000)

Realized − Expected F loodDays(t)
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctr-Sup Ctr-Year FE
Observations
R2

(b) Continuous Measure: Expected > Realized Exposure to Heat or Floods

62

Table 9: Transitory Shocks and Relationship Termination
Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the effect of transitory weather shocks on the
likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. Realized Heat Days and Realized F lood Days measure the
number of heat and flood days at the supplier locations in a given year. (Realized − Expected Shocks) is the
continuous difference between the realized and expected number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of
the supplier-customer relationship. The variable construction is illustrated in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at
the supplier-customer pair-year level. The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given
supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or
supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from
the headquarters, and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests. Fixed
effects are included as indicated in the table. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. z-test
indicates the p-value from a z-test, testing the hypothesis that the difference between coefficient estimates in adjacent
models (i.e. Columns (1) and (2), (3) and (4), etc.) are zero. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
(1)
Realized HeatDays(t)

(2)

0.0002
(0.000)

∗

Realized − Expected HeatDays(t)

0.0014∗∗∗
(0.000)

(3)
0.0001
(0.000)

(4)

0.0007∗∗
(0.000)

Realized F loodDays(t)

(5)

0.0005∗∗∗
(0.000)

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

0.0037∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
No

127313
.
0.566

123384
0.000
0.564

123884
.
0.618

119946
0.027
0.616

127313
.
0.566

124424
0.000
0.564

Realized − Expected F loodDays(t)
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctr-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
Z-test
R2

(6)

63

(7)

-0.0003∗
(0.000)

(8)

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0005
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes

123884
.
0.618

121022
0.076
0.616

Table 10: Expected vs. Realized Climate Risk – Cross-Section
Notes. This table shows the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the impact of weather shock exceedance on supply-chain
relationship termination. The measure 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) takes the value of one in year t if the
difference between the realized number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer
relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of heat and flood days, and zero otherwise. The construction
is shown in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level. The dependent variable
is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t,
and zero otherwise. Similar to Table 5, “Sup-Ind Competitiveness” is the number of firms (in thousands) per SIC
2-digit industry of the supplier. “Input-Ind. Concentration” is the HHI of inputs per customer industry from the BEA
Input-Output matrices. “Relationship Length” is the time in years since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship
for the current period t. “Sales Correlation” is the running correlation of supplier and customer sales over the previous
9 quarters. We apply similar data filters as in Table 7. Each regression includes supplier and customer-industry-by-year
fixed effects, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard
errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
(1)
1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t)

0.006
(0.004)
0.006∗
(0.003)
∗

1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Sup-Ind Comp.
1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Input-Ind Conc.
1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Rel. Length

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.013
(0.004)

0.019
(0.003)

0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)

∗∗∗

-0.003
(0.063)

1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Sales Corr.
Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.157
(0.279)

Input-Ind Conc.
Rel. Length

0.140
(0.091)

Sales Corr.
Sup-Ind × Year FE
Cus-Ind × Yr FE
Cus-Ctry × Sup-Ctry × Yr FE
Observations
R2

-0.004∗∗∗
(0.001)

0.007∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.005
(0.006)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.007
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes

126140
0.398

50163
0.465

126145
0.399

78844
0.398

(a) Heat, Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity

64

∗∗∗

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t)
1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Sup-Ind Comp.
1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Input-Ind Conc.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.006
(0.004)
0.009∗∗
(0.004)

0.019∗∗∗
(0.005)

0.043∗∗∗
(0.004)

0.002
(0.003)

1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Rel. Length

-0.044
(0.073)

1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Sales Corr.
Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.154
(0.279)

Input-Ind Conc.
Rel. Length

0.152∗
(0.086)

Sales Corr.
Sup-Ind × Year FE
Cus-Ind × Yr FE
Cus-Ctry × Sup-Ctry × Yr FE
Observations
R2

0.008∗∗∗
(0.001)

-0.014∗∗
(0.007)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

0.009∗∗
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes

126140
0.398

50163
0.465

126145
0.400

78844
0.398

(b) Floods, Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity

65

-0.011∗∗∗
(0.001)

Table 11: Experienced Exposure, Projections, and Relationship Termination
Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the effect of 1(Realized > Expected Shocks) on
the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The construction of the measure is illustrated in Figure 2.
Estimates are presented separately for the full sample (column 4), as well as subsets of suppliers located in areas
which are projected to experience limited change in temperatures. The projected change is estimated as the difference
between the number of days over 30° Celsius from 2006-2019 and 2040-2049. Projections are obtained from the
MPI-ESM-LR model, and averaged across all available ensemble members for the RCP 2.6, 4.5, and 8.5 scenario. We
exclude observations before the issue of the IPCC 4th assessment report in 2007. In Panel 11a (11b) the expected
exposure is estimated over 10 (15) years prior to the relationship. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer
pair-year level. The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer
relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or supplier firms in
the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from the headquarters,
and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests. The regressions include
supplier and customer-industry-by-year fixed effects and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as
indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

≈0 RCP2.6

≈0 RCP4.5

≈0 RCP8.5

Full Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctr-Sup Ctr-Year FE

0.011∗∗∗
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.012∗∗
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.017∗∗
(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.017∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

49932
0.431

33122
0.455

20147
0.471

102975
0.427

1(Realized > Expected HeatDays)(t)

(a) Exceeded Expected Exposure and Projections, prior formed over 10-year benchmark period.

≈0 RCP2.6

≈0 RCP4.5

≈0 RCP8.5

Full Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.022∗∗∗

0.021∗∗∗

Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctr-Sup Ctr-Year FE

(0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.014∗∗∗

(0.007)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.021∗∗∗
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

49932
0.431

33122
0.455

20147
0.471

102975
0.427

1(Realized > Expected HeatDays)(t)

(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes

(b) Exceeded Expected Exposure and Projections, prior formed over 15-year benchmark period.

66

Table 12: Physical Climate Risk and Supplier Substitution
Notes. This table shows the effect of physical climate risk on supplier substitution. We match supplier firms for which the supplier-customer relationship is
terminated during the sample period (i.e. old suppliers) with their likely replacements (i.e. new suppliers). Replacements are identified as firms with identical
4-digit SIC codes, which enter a new supply-chain relationship with the given customer within one year of the previous Panels 12a and 12c show linear probability
model estimates on the likelihood that the exposure to weather shocks of new replacement suppliers is lower than the exposure of old replaced suppliers as a
function of 1(Realized > Expected Shocks). The dependent variable takes the value of one if new suppliers are exposed to fewer heat and flood days than old
suppliers, during and after the initial supply-chain relationship, respectively. In Columns (5) and (6) of Panel 12a, the dependent variable takes the value of one if
there are fewer shocks projected at the location of the new compared to the old supplier. Standard errors are clustered at the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The figures in Panels 12b and 12d show the corresponding distribution of the difference
(continuous measure) in exposure between new and old suppliers, measured during and after the relationship, and according to IPCC projections, respectively.

Decrease Dur. Initial Rel.(0/1)

Decrease Aft. Initial Rel. (0/1)

Decrease Projected Days (0/1)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

∗∗∗

0.121
(0.023)
Yes
Yes

∗∗∗

0.095
(0.026)
Yes
No

∗∗

0.057
(0.025)
Yes
Yes

∗∗

Sup Ind and Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE

0.149
(0.026)
Yes
No

∗∗∗

0.053
(0.025)
Yes
No

-0.022
(0.024)
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

16900
0.076

16526
0.232

16900
0.067

16526
0.224

16900
0.055

16526
0.227

1Realized > Expected HeatDays(t)

(5)

(6)

67

(a) Expected and Actual Decrease in Exposure to Heat

(b) Distribution in Heat Exposure: During the Initial Relationship | After the Initial Relationship | IPCC Projections

Decrease Dur. Initial Rel.(0/1)

Decrease Aft. Initial Rel. (0/1)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.614∗∗∗

0.073∗∗

Sup Ind and Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE

(0.023)
Yes
No

0.613∗∗∗

(0.029)
Yes
No

0.008
(0.029)
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

16900
0.403

16526
0.513

16900
0.054

16526
0.246

1 (Realized > Expected F loodDays) (t)

(0.020)
Yes
Yes

(c) Expected and Actual Decrease in Exposure to Floods

(d) Distribution in Flood Exposure: During the Initial Relationship | After the Initial Relationship

68

Verbal Description Table 12 describes the difference in climate exposure of old and new suppliers
after supply-chain relationships are terminated. It combines two tables and two figures. This
description covers the figures in Panel (b) and (d).
Figure 12b consists of three charts. Each of the charts plots the distribution of the difference in
the number of heat days per year between a replaced supplier and the replacement to learn about
the extent to which customers seek replacement suppliers with less exposure to climate shocks.
Moreover, each of the charts overlays the distributions of two subsamples to compare the changes
in climate exposure for terminations that (1) may have been related to climate change in red and
(2) are less likely to have been affected by considerations about climate-related risks in blue. We
assume that the terminations may be related to suppliers’ climate exposure when the exposure of
the supplier to heat days during the supply-chain relationship exceeded what the customer could
have expected ex-ante based on historical priors (red distribution). In contrast, we assume that
terminations are less likely to be related to climate change-related concerns when the exposure to
heat days was lower than or equal to historical expectations before the start of the supply-chain
relationship (blue distribution).
The first graph (left) shows the difference in annual heat days per year for old and new suppliers,
calculating the average number of heat days per year in the time period of the initial supply-chain
relationship. The second chart (middle) shows the distributions of the difference when we calculate
the average heat exposure for the time period starting after the initial relationship ends until the
end of the sample period. The third chart (right) shows the distributions of the differences based on
future expected number of heat days per year based on IPCC projections (CMIP5 RCP 4.5).
In the left chart of Panel (b), the blue and red distribution of the difference in heat exposure
during the initial supply-chain relationship are similar in shape but differ noticeably left of their
center. Both distributions are unimodal and centered around 0. However, the red distribution
has a density of ≈0.015 at the center, whereas the density at the center of the blue distribution is
≈0.0275. The red distribution is denser left of its center and has a longer and thicker left tail. The
blue distribution is more concentrated right around its center. Right of the center, the red and blue
distribution are hard to distinguish. This pattern is consistent with the idea that customers may
seek new suppliers with a relatively lower exposure to climate shocks when the terminations are
motivated by concerns about climate change. In the middle chart of Panel (b), both distributions
also show a similar shape. Both distributions are centered around zero, with a higher density of the
blue distribution (peak in density around 0.025 compared to 0.015 for the red distribution). Again,
the red distribution is denser left of its center and has a longer and thicker left tail. Right of the
center, the red and blue distribution are hard to distinguish. Compared to the chart on the left
which measures the difference in heat days during the initial relationship, the difference in density
left of the center is less pronounced when the difference in annual heat days is calculated after the
end of the initial relationship. In the right chart of Panel (b), we compare the distributions for the
future expected number of heat days using IPCC projections. Once again, both distributions are
similar in shape with their center close to zero and with a higher density around the peak of the
blue distribution (peak in density around 0.0125 compared to 0.01 for the red distribution). The
tails are difficult to distinguish, with a slightly higher density of the red distribution right of the
center but a longer left tail of the blue distribution. The corresponding table in Panel (a) shows the
statistical significance of the difference of the means of the blue and red distribution for each of the
charts.
The charts in Panel (d) correspond to Panel (b) but show the distribution of the differences
for flood days. The figure consists are two charts. Since the IPCC projections are specific to
temperatures, we only compare the differences in flood days based on observed data during the
initial relationship (left) and after the initial relationship is terminated (right). In the left chart, the
69

blue and red distribution are both unimodal but differ in their center, with the blue distribution
centered just above and the red distribution centered just below 0. The blue distribution has a
density of ≈0.15 at the center, whereas the density at the center of the red distribution is ≈0.09.
The red distribution is denser left of its center and has a thicker left tail. The blue distribution is
more concentrated right of its center. In the right chart of Panel (d), both distributions are again
unimodal and show the same difference in centers, with the blue distribution peaking just above
and the red distribution peaking just below zero. The difference in density is less noticeable (peak
in density around 0.12 for the blue and 0.09 for the red distribution). The red (blue) distribution is
slightly denser left (right) of its center. Compared to the left chart which measures the difference
in heat days during the initial relationship, the difference of the red and blue distribution is less
pronounced in the right chart. The corresponding table in Panel (c) shows the statistical significance
of the difference of the means of the blue and red distribution for both of the charts.

70

A

Appendix
Table A1: Robustness – Physical Climate Risk and Supplier Firm Performance

Notes. This table shows robustness tests analogous to Table 3 on the impact of weather shocks at the location of
the supplier firms on their revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), using alternative heat and flood measures.
Both dependent variables are scaled by one-year lagged assets. The main independent variables, Heatw (30/7)(t) and
F lood (t), indicate the occurrence of heatwaves (i.e. >= 7 consecutive days with temperatures above 30° Celsius) and
floods (indicator variable if the firm is affected by a flood) during the financial quarter as well as the three preceding
quarters (t − 3 to t). The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003
to 2017. We exclude firms in the financial industry as well as firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30
kilometers of the headquarters. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter
fixed effects, as well as controls for country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction
terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and
Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level.

Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

Sup Rev/L.A (t)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.078
(0.071)
-0.226∗∗∗
(0.071)
-0.093
(0.070)
-0.144∗∗
(0.069)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.038∗
(0.020)
-0.044∗∗
(0.020)
-0.024
(0.019)
-0.047∗∗
(0.021)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.037∗
(0.020)
-0.047∗∗
(0.020)
-0.021
(0.019)
-0.049∗∗
(0.021)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.7667
202,438
5,628

0.6257
202,438
5,628

0.6311
202,438
5,628

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.009
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.006
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.006)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.003∗∗
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.004∗∗
(0.002)
-0.003∗
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Flood Severity (t)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.012∗∗
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.006)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.002
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.067
(0.070)
-0.195∗∗∗
(0.071)
-0.087
(0.070)
-0.113∗
(0.069)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7626
202,438
5,628

0.7667
202,438
5,628

0.6257
202,438
5,628

0.6310
202,438
5,628

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7626
202,438
5,628

Heat Days (30/95) (t)
Heat Days (30/95) (t-1)
Heat Days (30/95) (t-2)
Heat Days (30/95) (t-3)

Flood Severity (t-1)
Flood Severity (t-2)
Flood Severity (t-3)

(b) Direct Effects of Floods - Severity

(a) Direct Effects of Heat - Severity
Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.028
(0.047)
-0.019
(0.049)
-0.115∗∗
(0.048)
-0.003
(0.048)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.025
(0.048)
-0.013
(0.049)
-0.115∗∗
(0.048)
0.004
(0.049)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.029
(0.012)
-0.018
(0.014)
-0.011
(0.013)
0.001
(0.013)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.030
(0.012)
-0.018
(0.014)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.002
(0.013)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.149
(0.102)
-0.442∗∗∗
(0.103)
-0.244∗∗
(0.102)
-0.297∗∗∗
(0.101)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7626
202,438
5,628

0.7667
202,438
5,628

0.6257
202,438
5,628

0.6310
202,438
5,628

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7626
202,438
5,628

Count Heatw (30/7) (t)
Count Heatw (30/7) (t-1)
Count Heatw (30/7) (t-2)
Count Heatw (30/7) (t-3)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

(4)
∗∗

Count Floods (t)

∗∗

Count Floods (t-1)
Count Floods (t-2)
Count Floods (t-3)

(c) Direct Effects of Heat - Shock

(4)

-0.135
(0.103)
-0.452∗∗∗
(0.104)
-0.233∗∗
(0.103)
-0.307∗∗∗
(0.102)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

∗

-0.050
(0.029)
-0.053∗
(0.029)
-0.031
(0.028)
-0.069∗∗
(0.029)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.045
(0.030)
-0.055∗
(0.029)
-0.024
(0.028)
-0.067∗∗
(0.029)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.7668
202,438
5,628

0.6257
202,438
5,628

0.6310
202,438
5,628

(d) Direct Effects of Floods - Shock

71

Table A2: Robustness – Heterogeneity of Direct Effects of Physical Climate Risk
Notes. This table shows OLS regression estimates on the effects of heat and floods on supplier revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI) by industry.
Both dependent variables are scaled by lagged assets. Industry classifications are based on SIC 1-digit codes. The independent variables Heat Days (t) and
F lood Days (t) indicate the number of days on which heat and floods occur during the financial quarter as well as the three preceding quarters (t − 3 to t).
The column Joint Test indicates if the effects of heat or flood days on Revenues or Income is significant at or above the 10%-level for a given industry (+ for
revenues, /+ for operating income). The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We exclude firms in the
financial industry as well as firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the headquarters. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed
effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, and interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm
characteristics (BS2016 FE). Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Joint Test

Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

(1)

(2)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

0.023∗∗
(0.010)
-0.042∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.053∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.031∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.042∗∗
(0.018)
-0.023
(0.014)
-0.107∗
(0.059)
-0.107
(0.071)
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.003
(0.002)
-0.006∗∗
(0.003)
-0.008∗∗
(0.003)
-0.005∗∗
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
-0.007∗∗
(0.003)
-0.019
(0.013)
0.012
(0.030)
Yes
Yes
Yes

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7622
202,438
5,628

0.6248
202,438
5,628

Heat Days

72

Heat Days × Mining/Constr

+

Heat Days × Services

+/+

Heat Days × Manufacturing

/+

Heat Days × Wholes/Retail
Heat Days × Transport
Heat Days × Agriculture
Heat Days × Administr

/+

Direct Effects of Heat by Industry

Joint Test

Sup Rev/L.A (t)

Sup OpI/L.A (t)

(1)

(2)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.070∗∗∗
(0.014)
0.059∗∗∗
(0.017)
0.060∗∗∗
(0.021)
0.048∗∗∗
(0.016)
0.062∗∗
(0.029)
0.075∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.116
(0.081)
0.042
(0.118)
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.009∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.007∗
(0.004)
0.006∗
(0.003)
0.006
(0.004)
0.009∗∗
(0.004)
-0.021∗
(0.012)
0.088∗
(0.049)
Yes
Yes
Yes

R2
Observations
Suppliers

0.7623
202,438
5,628

0.6249
202,438
5,628

Flood Days
Flood Days × Mining/Constr

/+

Flood Days × Services
Flood Days × Manufacturing

+/+

Flood Days × Wholes/Retail
Flood Days × Transport
Flood Days × Agriculture
Flood Days × Administr

+/+

Direct Effects of Floods by Industry

Table A3: Robustness – Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks
Notes. This table shows OLS regression estimates analogous to Table 4 on the effect of weather shocks at the supplier
locations on their customers’ revenues over assets (Rev) and operating income over assets (OpI), using indicator
variables for heatwaves and floods. Both dependent variables are scaled by one-year lagged assets. Sup Heatwaves (t)
and Sup F loods (t) are the total number of heatwaves or floods that occurred at the locations of a given customer’s
suppliers in quarter t. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-quarter level. In Panel A3a the
independent variables represent dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a heatwave (at least seven consecutive
days over 30°C) and flood, respectively. In Panel A3b, Sup Heat Days (30/95) measures the number of days across
suppliers in a quarter with local temperatures both above 30°C and above the local 95th percentile. Sup F lood Severity
is an indicator variable for the occurrence of a severe flood across supplier locations. We apply similar data filters as
in Table 4. All regressions include relationship-by-quarter fixed effects as well as year-by-quarter fixed effects. In
both Panels, Columns (2) and (4) additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter
fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Table 4. Standard errors are clustered on the customer level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

(a) Weather Shocks – Indicator Variables
Cus Rev (t)

Cus OpI (t)

Cus Rev (t)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0693∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.0902∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.0490∗∗∗
(0.015)
-0.0442∗∗∗
(0.015)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0704∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.0960∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.0693∗∗∗
(0.016)
-0.0567∗∗∗
(0.015)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0142∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0187∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0086∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0087∗∗∗
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0110∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0151∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0095∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0082∗∗
(0.003)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

123700
.884

123700
.886

123700
.707

123700
.711

Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-0)
Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-1)
Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-2)
Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-3)

Cus OpI (t)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0799∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.0702∗∗∗
(0.021)
-0.0734∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.0616∗∗∗
(0.019)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0712∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.0636∗∗∗
(0.023)
-0.0759∗∗∗
(0.020)
-0.0552∗∗∗
(0.021)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0192∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0148∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0186∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0113∗∗∗
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0145∗∗∗
(0.005)
-0.0123∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0163∗∗∗
(0.004)
-0.0069∗
(0.004)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

123700
.884

123700
.886

123700
.707

123700
.711

Sup Flood Dummy (t-0)
Sup Flood Dummy (t-1)
Sup Flood Dummy (t-2)
Sup Flood Dummy (t-3)

(b) Weather Shocks – Alternative Definitions
Cus Rev (t)

Cus OpI (t)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0042∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0043∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0029∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0019∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0043∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0044∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0037∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0028∗∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0008∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0008∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0005∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0004∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0006∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0006∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0005∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0004∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
Customers
R2

123700
6299
.884

123700
6299
.886

123700
6299
.707

123700
6299
.711

Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-0)
Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-1)
Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-2)
Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-3)

Cus Rev (t)
(2)

(3)

(4)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0539∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.0489∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.0507∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.0414∗∗∗
(0.012)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0495∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.0458∗∗∗
(0.014)
-0.0513∗∗∗
(0.013)
-0.0390∗∗∗
(0.013)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0133∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0112∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0128∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0071∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0100∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0093∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.0110∗∗∗
(0.003)
-0.0042∗
(0.002)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
Customers
R2

123700
6299
.884

123700
6299
.886

123700
6299
.707

123700
6299
.711

Sup Flood Severity (t-0)
Sup Flood Severity (t-1)
Sup Flood Severity (t-2)
Sup Flood Severity (t-3)

73

Cus OpI (t)

(1)

Table A4: Robustness – Propagation of Weather Shocks over EM-DAT
Notes. This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of weather shocks at the supplier locations on the financial performance of their customers.
Financial performance is measured as revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by one-year lagged assets. The unit of observation is at the
customer-quarter level. The sample period is from 2003 to 2017. Heat Days (t) (ex. EM DAT ) and F lood Days (t) (ex. EM DAT ) are count variables indicating
the number of heat and flood days in the supplier’s location in quarter t, in excess of shocks recorded by the EM-DAT international disaster database. We
apply similar data filters as in Tables 3 and 4. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects as well as industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects and
country-specific linear trend fixed effects. Columns (2) and (4) in each panel additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter
fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Tables 3 and 4. Standard errors are clustered at the customer-firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
5% and 1% level, respectively.
Cus Rev (t)
(1)
Sup Heat Days (t-0) (ex. EMDAT)

Cus OpI (t)

(2)

(3)

Cus Rev (t)

(4)

(1)

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0011
(0.000)
-0.0012∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0012∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0006∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0012
(0.000)
-0.0014∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0016∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0009∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0002
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0002
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗∗
(0.000)
-0.0002∗∗
(0.000)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

123700
.884

123700
.886

123700
.707

123700
.711

Sup Heat Days (t-1) (ex. EMDAT)
Sup Heat Days (t-2) (ex. EMDAT)
Sup Heat Days (t-3) (ex. EMDAT)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗

Sup Flood Days (t-0) (ex. EMDAT)

Cus OpI (t)

(2)

(3)

(4)

74

Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE

-0.0103
(0.005)
-0.0092∗
(0.005)
-0.0111∗∗
(0.005)
-0.0157∗∗∗
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0092
(0.005)
-0.0093∗
(0.005)
-0.0120∗∗
(0.005)
-0.0155∗∗∗
(0.005)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0032
(0.001)
-0.0031∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0032∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0032∗∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.0028∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0032∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0032∗∗∗
(0.001)
-0.0029∗∗∗
(0.001)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R2

123700
.884

123700
.886

123700
.707

123700
.711

Sup Flood Days (t-1) (ex. EMDAT)
Sup Flood Days (t-2) (ex. EMDAT)
Sup Flood Days (t-3) (ex. EMDAT)

∗

∗

∗∗∗

Table A5: Robustness – Downstream Propagation – Cross Section
Notes. Analogous to Table 5, this table presents OLS regression estimates on cross-sectional differences in the
impact of heat and flooding at the location of the suppliers on customer performance. The dependent variable in
both panels is customer revenue (Rev), scaled by one-year lagged assets. Heat Days (t, t − 3) (Panel A5a) and
F lood Days (t, t − 3) (Panel A5b) measures the total number of heat and flood days at all suppliers of a given customer
during the contemporaneous and previous three quarters. The data is organized at the customer-year-quarter level
and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. All other variables are defined as in Table 5. We apply similar data filters as
in Table 5. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, and
for country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size,
age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE). Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Cus Rev (t)
Heat Days (t,t-3)
Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility
Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.1018∗
(0.060)
-0.0013
(0.002)

-0.0649∗∗
(0.028)

-0.2367∗∗∗
(0.046)

-0.0703∗
(0.039)

-0.1306∗∗∗
(0.034)

-0.2059∗∗∗
(0.051)

-0.1247∗∗∗
(0.026)

-0.1817∗∗∗
(0.032)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.0048∗∗∗
(0.001)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc.

0.0810∗∗
(0.038)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory

-0.0893
(0.074)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers.

-0.0007
(0.003)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr.

0.0396∗
(0.020)

Heat Days (t,t-3) × Rel. Length
Sup Tangibility
Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.4888
(0.672)

Sup-Ind Comp.

0.2961
(0.568)

Cus Inventory

-4.9306
(19.664)

56.0093∗∗∗
(3.991)

Sup Divers.
Sales Corr.

-77.2286∗∗∗
(18.155)

Rel. Length
Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE
Observations
R2

-0.0005
(0.001)

-0.6969∗∗∗
(0.211)

0.0161∗∗
(0.008)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-9.2461
(5.920)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

117039
0.887

123700
0.886

102762
0.886

54188
0.878

114095
0.882

122162
0.887

93025
0.893

123700
0.886

(a) Heat

75

Cus Rev (t)
Flood Days (t,t-3)
Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility
Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.0880
(0.297)
-0.0172∗
(0.009)

-0.2049
(0.159)

-1.3050∗∗∗
(0.295)

-0.5523∗∗
(0.233)

-0.5444∗∗∗
(0.192)

-1.1313∗∗∗
(0.298)

-0.4261∗∗∗
(0.131)

-1.1484∗∗∗
(0.265)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.0218∗∗∗
(0.007)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc.

0.7156∗∗∗
(0.276)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory

-0.1054
(0.425)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers.

-0.0050
(0.020)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr.

0.3128∗∗
(0.137)

Flood Days (t,t-3) × Rel. Length
Sup Tangibility
Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.3776
(0.646)

Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.2846
(0.558)

Cus Inventory

0.5088
(19.420)

56.1943∗∗∗
(3.921)

Sup Divers.
Sales Corr.

-85.1009∗∗∗
(17.932)

Rel. Length
Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE
Ind × Year-Qtr FE
Ctry-Linear-Trends
BS2016 FE
Observations
R2

-0.0064
(0.005)

-0.6886∗∗∗
(0.203)

0.1873∗∗
(0.084)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-7.2855
(5.853)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

117039
0.887

123700
0.886

102762
0.885

54188
0.878

114095
0.882

122162
0.886

93025
0.892

123700
0.886

(b) Floods

76

Table A6: Robustness: Alternative Estimation Periods, Relationship Termination
Notes. Analogous to Panel 7a of Table 7, this table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact
of the exceedance of weather shock expectations on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The
sample and variables are constructed similarly as in Table 7. The main difference to Table 7 is that Panels A6a
and A6b use benchmark periods of five and fifteen years before the establishment of a supply-chain relationship to
construct our main variables of interest, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t), as illustrated in Figure 2. We apply
similar data filters as in Table 7. The regressions include relationship fixed effects, year fixed effects, supplier and
customer-industry-by-year, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust
standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%
and 1% level, respectively.

OLS - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.007
(0.002)

0.006
(0.002)

0.010
(0.002)

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

126205
0.313

126205
0.320

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

(4)

(5)

(6)

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.018∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
No
No
No

0.017∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.010∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

126205
0.380

126205
0.314

126205
0.320

126205
0.380

∗∗∗

1Realized > Expected F loodDays
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
R2

(a) Alternative Expected Exposure Estimates, 5 Years Before Relationship

OLS - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.010∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.008∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.011∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.011∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
No
No
No

0.010∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.007∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

126205
0.313

126205
0.320

126205
0.380

126205
0.313

126205
0.320

126205
0.380

1Realized > Expected F loodDays
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
R2

(b) Alternative Expected Exposure Estimates, 15 Years Before Relationship

77

Table A7: Robustness – Initial Years and Restarts, Relationship Termination
Notes. Analogous to Panel 7a, this table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact of the exceedance
of weather shock expectations on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The sample and variables are
constructed similarly as in Table 7. In Panel A7a, we exclude supplier firms that were delisted within one year of the end
of the supply-chain relationship. In Panel A7b, we set the independent variable 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t)
to zero in the first year of the relationship. In Panel A7c, we exclude relationships which are only temporarily
interrupted. These observations account for 6.37% of the observations in our sample. We apply similar data filters
as in Table 7. The regressions include year fixed effects, supplier-industry-by-year, supplier-country-by-year, and
supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the
relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
(1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays

(2)

(3)

0.004
(0.002)

0.002
(0.002)

0.007
(0.002)

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

120106
0.303

120106
0.311

∗

(4)

(5)

(6)

No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.016∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
No
No
No

0.015∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.014∗∗∗
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

120106
0.374

120106
0.304

120106
0.311

120106
0.374

∗∗∗

1Realized > Expected F loodDays
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
R2

(a) Excluding Delisted Suppliers

Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.065∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.064∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.068∗∗∗
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.039∗∗∗
(0.003)
Yes
No
No
No

0.039∗∗∗
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.035∗∗∗
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

126205
0.318

126205
0.325

126205
0.384

126205
0.315

126205
0.322

126205
0.381

1Realized > Expected F loodDays
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
R2

(b) Excluding Signal in the First Year of the Relationship

78

Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1)
1Realized > Expected HeatDays

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.009∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.007∗∗∗
(0.002)

0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.019∗∗∗
(0.002)
Yes
No
No
No

0.018∗∗∗
(0.002)
No
Yes
Yes
No

0.013∗∗∗
(0.003)
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
No
No

No
Yes
Yes
No

117919
0.305

117919
0.312

117919
0.375

117919
0.305

117919
0.312

117919
0.375

1Realized > Expected F loodDays
Year FE
Sup Ind-Year FE
Cus Ind-Year FE
Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE
Observations
R2

(c) Excluding Temporarily Interrupted Relationships (6.37% of Sample)

79

Table A8: Robustness – Weather Shocks and Relationship Duration
Notes. This table presents Cox proportional hazard model regression estimates on the impact of realized vs. expected
weather shocks on supply-chain relationship duration. The dependent variable is the number of years from the
beginning to the end of a given supplier-customer relationship. The start of a supplier-customer relationship is the first
year the relationship is documented in the Factset Revere database, the end is the year a relationship is terminated.
We drop relationships that were terminated and subsequently restarted at some point in our sample. Following Fee
et al. (2006), if a relationship lasts until the final year of the sample period, we treat the duration of relationship
as being right-censored. The main independent variable is defined as max [1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t)]
for each supplier-customer relationship, i.e. the maximum of an indicator variable that takes the value of one in
year t if the difference between the realized number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of the
supply-chain relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of days, and zero otherwise, across all years
t in which the relationship is active. We apply similar data filters as in Table 7. The unit of observation is at the
supplier-customer pair level. Strata for the first year of each relationship (FY), and customer-by-industry-by-FY,
supplier-by-industry-by-FY and supplier-country-by-FY are included as indicated. The table reports coefficient
estimates, not hazard ratios. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent Variable: Duration of the Relationship
(1)
1(Realized > Expected HeatDays)(t)

(2)

(3)

-0.273
(0.021)

-0.332
(0.018)

-0.464
(0.024)

34945
Yes
No
No

34455
No
Yes
No

34455
No
Yes
Yes

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

1(Realized > Expected F loodDays)(t)
Observations
First Year (FY)
Cus Ind-FY, Sup Ind-FY
Cus Ind-FY, Sup Ind-FY, Sup Ctr-FY

80

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.318∗∗∗
(0.022)

-0.305∗∗∗
(0.018)

-0.401∗∗∗
(0.024)

34945
Yes
No
No

34455
No
Yes
No

34455
No
Yes
Yes

∗∗∗

