See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281279488

Impacts of extreme weather in supply chains
Article in Időjárás · July 2014

CITATIONS

READS

8

3,353

2 authors, including:
Beáta Pató
Eötvös Loránd University
33 PUBLICATIONS 213 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Beáta Pató on 27 August 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

IDŐJÁRÁS
Quarterly Journal of the Hungarian Meteorological Service
Vol. 118, No. 3, July – September, 2014, pp. 283–291

Impacts of extreme weather in supply chains
Zoltán Kovács and Beáta Sz. G. Pató*

University of Pannonia, Department of Supply Chain Management
Veszprém, Egyetem u. 10, H-8200, Hungary
*Corresponding author E-mail: patog@vnet.hu
(Manuscript received in final form March 10, 2014)

Abstract—There are many phenomena which confirm the fact of climate change. Two
kinds of responses are mentioned often to this fact: 1. Actions by which this process can
be interrupted or slowed down. 2. Accepting the fact of changes and finding adaptive
strategies.
Authors present a research which aimed to increase the responsiveness of supply
chains for the climate change – especially extreme weather. Secondary and primary
investigation were carried out, and the nominal group technique was used to discover,
group and assess the potential threats.
Results so far pointed out that both physical and control processes are involved in
extreme whether consequences. Findings give good bases for a substantial risk analysis
for any disaster coming from the climate change or other reasons.
The research is supported by the Government of Hungary.
Key-words: Climate change, disaster management in supply chains, extreme weather.

1. Introduction
Extreme weather event might cause wide range of problems in everyday life.
While there is a debate on the fact of climate change (Nordhaus, 2013) and its
possible source, there is no doubt that being ready for unexpected weather evens
is not a bad decision. There are studies which deal with the source and
implications of extreme weather.
Stott et al. (2004), in their pioneering study, concluded that human
influence more than doubled the likelihood of the heat wave occurring. An
283

OECD study (Agrawala et al., 2011) discovered that while companies are
generally aware of the physical implications of climate change, few include it
into their risk management system.
From this point of view, there are two possible strategies:
1. To reduce the climate change effects – mostly emission – in order to
slow down or to turn back the negative trend. We have to be aware that
outcomes of corrective and preventive actions will show up in middle or
long time horizon.
2. To learn to live with climate change at least on middle range and to do
our best to adapt to the situation.
Weather sensitive sectors such as agriculture, horticulture, food industries are
involved mostly. Thorpe and Fennel (2012) present three case studies from
coffee, cotton, and sesame oil business. Since supply is vital in wide area of
society and life, it is important to examine the implications of climate change.
The effects can have influence in direct and indirect ways.
Present youngsters are the most involved in the consequences of climate
change. In the State of the Union speech, President Obama urged Congress “to
get together, pursue a bipartisan, market-based solution to climate change, like
the one John McCain and Joe Lieberman worked on together a few years ago.”
In his second inauguration speech (January, 2013), the president said: “We will
respond to the threat of climate change, knowing that failure to do so would
betray our children and future generations. Some may still deny the
overwhelming judgment of science, but none can avoid the devastating impact
of raging fires, and crippling drought, and more powerful storms.”
The topic is especially relevant in Hungary, since we faced some extreme
weather events recently, such as extreme temperature, excessive rainfall,
flooding, and spring snowstorms.
Recognizing this and the fact that certain aspects of climate change issues
are inevitable, University of Pannonia defined a project to carry out research on
consequences of climate change, especially weather phenomena issues.
Economics, agriculture, engineering, and social science researchers work in the
project supported by the EU and the Hungarian government.
Inside economics, the main analyzed areas are: macroeconomics, regional
development, tourism, health sector, and supply chains. Part of the research is a
literature review, such as we introduced above. The other part is primary
research, in first stage mostly forecast.
First we tried to discover a wide set of implications. The method we have
used is the nominal group technique.
In our research we asked master level students – who are in supply chain
related programs – about their judgments on the possible consequences of
climate change, especially extreme weather.
284

2. Literature review
The main research question was to learn the opinion of next generation about
weather change implications in supply chains.
According to International Energy Agency (2013), it is possible that global
warming will be more than two degrees Celsius. Above this limit the climate
could become unstable. This will affect production and transport processes as
well. Carey (2011) suggests that extreme weather events have become more
common in recent years.
Czifra, et al. (2013) argue that climate change affects competitiveness.
According to IPCC’s annual report (Trenberth, 1999), Hungary is acutely
vulnerable. Based on this forecast climate change will turn the weather towards
extreme events. The temperature will be higher than it is now, and we can
expect stormy winters with more fall (Czifra, et al., 2013).
In Hungary one of the main supply related implications will be the
deterioration of transport infrastructure. Extreme weather phenomena such as
storm, flooding, high temperature, lots of fall will cause damages in transport
infrastructure. Hunyadi (2010) gives examples for possible damages of road
infrastructure. Gáspár (2003, 2004) has set up road durability requirements. He
suggests that the requirement pyramid (Fig. 1) will change in the future as a
respond to climate change.

Users’
needs

Safety, convenience, travel time, accessibility

Functional
requirements
Constructional
requirements
Material
property
Raw material
property requirements

Roughness, noise reduction, traffic lanes
Strength, durability, etc.
Fatigue strength, deformation, cracks,
thickness
Composition, particle distribution,
voids content, density, brevity,
penetration, etc.

Fig. 1. Surface performance requirement related pyramid of requirements (Gáspár, 2003)

285

Hunyadi (2010) argues planting vegetation near the roads which have
larger tolerance limits, in order to take consideration the effects of climate
change in advance. Gáspár (2003) suggests life cycle design:”life cycle design
includes both design methods and their phases which take into consideration
economic issues, cultural integration and ecological aspects”.
In addition to the environmental impacts on supply chains, there is an other
important factor: restructuring of customer needs. Production infrastructure and
distribution networks have to adjust to them (Czifra et al, 2013).
Caldwell et al. (2013) and others (Thrope and Fennel, 2012) examined the
potential impacts of climate change to freight transport. Table 1 summarizes the
direct and indirect effects of meteorological factors on terrestial traffic safety.
Jüttner et al. (2003) give an overview of the potential research areas.

Table 1. Effects of weather on surface traffic safety (Vissy and Bátyi, 1998)
Direct effects
Surface conditions
(road, rail)

Visibility

Loading

Snowing

Fog

Wind

Snowdrift

Heavy rainfall

Heavy rainfall

Indirect effects
Biometeorological effects
(front effects)
Accident
prevention

Health and
safety

Temperature

There are relatively small number of researches on the opinion of the future
generation, however, Revesz and Shahabian (2010) evaluate opportunities for
intergenerational discounting, which are often conflated in the literature. They
have found that the existing justifications do not support the prevalent approach
of discounting benefits to future generations at the rate of return in financial
markets and, more generally, that discounting cannot substitute for a moral
theory setting forth our obligations to future generations.
3. Research methodology and results
As previous studies from literature show, implications of climate changes
include wide areas of supply chains. We can say that the whole society is
involved in the climate change, partly due to the effects in supply chains. There
are different ways to discover opinions on the topic.
Zaltman et al. (1982) and Yin (1994) used discovery oriented, practitionerbased approach, with semi-structured interviews.
286

The nominal group technique (NGT) is a group-based problem solving or
decision making method (Delbecq and VandeVen, 1971, 1975; VandeVen and
Delbecq, 1974). It combines the amenities of the un/low structured
brainstorming and formal voting. We have followed the next steps:
1. Introduction and explanation: We welcomed the participants, who were
master students in logistics, management, MBA and industrial engineering.
We provided the question in written form on the top of an A4 format page:
What are the impacts of extreme weather to the operation of supply chains?
We have raised participants’ attention to the importance of the question.
2. Silent generation of ideas: We asked participants to put down possible
answers to the paper. Since any interaction is prohibited, in this phase we
asked them not to consult or discuss their ideas with others. This stage
lasted 10 minutes. In this stage, we repressed not only negative but useful
positive interactions also. We allowed them in next steps.
3. Sharing ideas: We invited participants to read their ideas they have written
on the paper. If they ran out of idea, they could ‘pass’. If they have new idea
– generated by others – they can join again. They can further develop
others’ ideas. We recorded each idea into a spreadsheet using the same
words as participants formulated their ideas. (They were asked to use not
more than 3 words to compose their idea.)

The round robin process continued until all ideas have been
presented. Since this phase supports only positive interaction, they
could hear each other but were not allowed to comment others’ ideas.
4. Discussion: Participants were invited to seek verbal explanation or further
details about any of the ideas that others have produced that may not be
clear to them. Anybody could ask, comment, interpret, explain any ideas on
the screen. New ideas were generated, others were combined, extended or
deleted (when they are proved to be equal with others: they called
duplicates). There are two dangers in this stage (based on our more than 30
years NGT experiences):
― Drawing together ideas might result so-called ‘super idea’ which will
get lots of votes but is not concrete at all, thus, it can not be made real.
Sometimes ‘super idea’ and some of its parts exist simultaneously.
― There will be similar good ideas, which will compete again each other and
share votes. In this way, each of them gets little weight and will drop out.
It is important for the facilitator to keep good balance in the weight of
ideas. Such aspects are complexity, extent, related hierarchy level of ideas.
In this stage, we have received the list of possible effects in Table 2.
287

Table 2. List of potential effects after group discussion

1 Product damage

36 Earthquake abyss engulfes the company

2 Communication problems in the EDI

37 Daily 8-hour work period may be fragmented
Increasing number of non-forecasted
38
transport errors
39 Closer relocation of supply chain players
40 Introduction of stricter limitations
41 Establishing specialized warehouses
42 Conflicts between partners
43 Consumer needs can not be satisfied
44 Material flow slows
More dense distribution points, necessity for
45
warehouses
46 Shutdown due to state of emergency
47 Appreciation of taking out insurance
48 Good condition tires can not be calculated
49 Market rankings change
50 Development of vehicles

3 Damage of factories
4 Routes are cancelled
5 Extreme work conditions
6 Other modal transport are forced
7 Cost, time, and resource losses
8 Low water-sailing ban
Increased preparations in the case of FMCG
9
products
10 Huge storm - closed airports
11 Increased transport ( supply) uncertainty
12 Additional storage costs
Appreciation of reliability models due to
13
increased uncertainty
14 Increased number of risk factors
Increased costs of mining, excavating raw
15
materials
16 Increased transport time requirement

51 Needs assessment difficulties
52 IT equipment damage
53 Stress

17 Companies that fall out of the supply chains

54 Longer delivery lead times

18 Electric grid dropouts complicate storing

55 Shipments over Arctic can not be solved

19 Necessity of work reorganization
Increased mental and physical load of
20
labour
Higher vulnerability of electronic products,
21
lower humidity during winter
22 Loss of goodwill due to delays and damages

56 Decentralized inventory management

23 Lack of agricultural products

61 Growing importance of forecasts

24 Physical delivery becomes impossible

62 Obstruction in mining

25 Difficult traffic conditions due to flooding

63 Rails freezing

26 Development of resistant packaging

64 Shifted seasonality
Appreciation of products with longer
65
warranty period
66 Chain problems accumulate
Increasing weight of security/safety
67
technology
68 Need for special storage conditions
69 Changes in priorities within the company
70 Co-operation with the army
Importance of loading and fastening
71
technology
72 Rail deformation

27 Railway comes to the fore
28 Coming out supply chain issues
29 Profile change is necessary (products)
30 Maintaining higher inventory
31 Accidents
32 Maintaining crisis staff
33 Alternative supply seeking
34 Further company social responsibilities
35 More pressure on co-operation, collaboration

288

57 Necessity of rationalization
58 Increased energy consumption
59 Appreciation of meteorological information
60 Weakening of political stability

5. Ranking: In this session there were little, spontaneous and informal
interaction between participants. They were busy with their voting papers
and selecting the most preferred ideas.
First they were asked to select the 5 most important effects from the list of
72. Then they ranked them. The ranking order was: 1 – 5 – 2 – 4 – 3 where
5 was the grade of the most important, 1 is the grade of least important one.
Finally, the grade points were summarized for all effects in the list of 72
ideas. Table 3 shows the final ranks of the effects.
Then we summarized the grade points.
Table 3. The final ranks
Rank Potential effects

Score

1.

Increased transport ( supply) uncertainty

22

2.

Cost, time and resource losses

21

3.

Routes are cancelled

15

4.

Damage of factories

12

5.

Accidents

11

6-7.

Appreciation of reliability models due to increased uncertainty

10

6-7.

Maintaining crisis staff

10

4. Conclusions
Looking at the list we can conclude, that students have a realistic judgment on
possible consequences of climate change, especially effects of extreme weather.
It is especially important in Hungary where the frequency of extreme weather
events is increasing, however, to put it cynically, they are tending to become not
extreme ones.
We did not asked the participants about the ‘to do’s, it will be the part of
further research. Based on their case studies Thorpe and Fennel (2012), using an
EOCD study, suggest five possible actions:
1. Raise awareness and understanding of adaptation within the business:
companies need to make more effort to understand and evaluate the
potential physical impacts.
2. Ask producers about current climate trends and impacts: talking to
producers directly, risks must be assessed.
3. Build longer-term and more stable relationships with suppliers: where
markets are more stable, producers are empowered to invest for the future.
289

4. Support community development and environmental sustainability: climate
resilient products, technologies, new forms of organizations and cooperations, managing social issues, new markets need to be supported.
5. Work through existing institutions, including governments.
Our other researches on modeling the implications (Kovács et al., 2014)
confirm this complex approach.
We are planning to get further information from the national disaster
management system. This research will include the evaluation of extreme
weather related cases such as snowstorm and flooding.
Acknowledgment–This paper presents the results of the projects TÁMOP-4.2.2/A-11/1-20120064.This project is supported by the European Union and co-financed by the European Social Fund.

References
Agrawala, S., Carraro, M., Kingsmill, N., Lanzi, E., Mullan, M., and Prudent-Richard, G. 2011:
Private Sector Engagement in Adaptation to Climate Change: Approaches to Managing Climate
Risks. OECD Environment Working Papers 39, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kg221jkf1g7-en.
Caldwell, H., Quinn, H.K., Menuier, J., Subrier, J., and Grenzeback, L., 2013: Potential Impacts of
Climate Change on Freight Transport. http://climate.dot.gov/documents/workshop1002
/caldwell.pdf.
Carey, J., 2011: Storm warnings: extreme weather is a product of climate change. Scientific American.
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/extreme-weather-caused-by-climate-change/
Czifra, T., Dobozi, E., Selmeczi, P., Kohán, Z., Rideg, A., and Schneller, K., 2013: A területfejlesztés 4
éves szakmai programja a klímaváltozás hatásainak mérséklésére (2010–2013).
http://www.vati.hu/files/sharedUploads/docs/ttei/A_teruletfejlesztes_klimaprogramja_20102013_1.pdf. In Hungarian)
Delbecq, A.L. and. VandeVen, A.H., 1971: A Group Process Model for Problem Identification and
Program Planning. J. Appl. Behav. Sci. VII (July/August, 1971), 466–491.
Delbecq, A.L., VandeVen, A.H., and Gustafson, D.H., 1975: Group Techniques for Program Planners.
Glenview, Illinois: Scott Foresman and Company.
Gáspár, L., 2003: Az élettartam mérnöki tudomány. Közlekedéstudomány 53, 81–129. (In Hungarian)
Gáspár, L., 2004: Az útburkolatok teljesítőképessége, Közúti mélyépítési szemle 54 (11), 7–12. (In
Hungarian)
Hunyadi, D., 2010: A klímaváltozás hatása a közlekedési infrastruktúrára. Közúti mélyépítési szemle
60 (3), 35–40. (In Hungarian)
International Energy Agency, 2013: Redrawing the Energy Climate MapWorld Energy Outlook
Special Report - released on 10 June 2013.
Jüttner, U., Peck, H. and Christopher, M., 2003: Supply chain risk management: outlining an agenda
for future research. Int. J. Logistics: Res. Appl. 6, 197–210.
Kovács Z., Pató Gáborné Szűcs B., and Szabó L., 2014: Logisztika a klímaváltozás körülményei
között. Logisztikai Híradó. 2014/1, 39–42. (In Hungarian)
Nordhaus, W.D., 2013: Why the Global Warming Skeptics Are Wrong? http://www.nybooks.com/
articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-skeptics-are-wrong/?pagination=false.
Revesz, L.R. and Shahabian, M.R., 2010: Climate Change and Future Generations. Southern California
Law Review 84, 1099–1164.

290

Stott, P.A., Stone, D.A., and Allen, M.R., 2004: Human contribution to the European heatwave of
2003. Nature 432, 610–614.
Thorpe, J. and Fennel, S., 2012: Climate Change Risks and Supply Chain Responsibility: How should
companies respond when extreme weather affects small-scale producers in their supply chain?”
Oxfam Discussion Papers, June 2012., www.oxfam.org.
Trenberth, K. E. 1999: Short-term Climate Variations. Recent accomplishments and issues for future
progress. (Eds: R. Pielke Sr and R. Pielke Jr) Storms Vol 1. Routledge Press. London. 126–141.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 2011: Assuring Food Security in
Developing Countries under the Challenges of Climate Change: Key Trade and Development
Issues of a Fundamental Transformation of Agriculture. Discussion Paper 2011(2).
VandeVen, A.H. and Delbecq, A.L., 1974: The effectiveness of nominal, Delphi, and interacting group
decision making processes. Acad. Manage J. 605–621.
Vissy, K. and Bátyi, F., 1998: A földfelszíni közlekedés meteorológiája. Természet Világa, 129. I.
különszám, 75–78. (In Hungarian)
Yin, R. 1994: Case study research: design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage.
Zaltman, G., Lemasters, K., and Heffring, K. 1982: Theory construction in marketing: some thoughts
on thinking. New York, Wiley.

291
View publication stats

