Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and socioeconomic impacts

Could climate
become the weak
link in your
supply chain?
Case study
August 2020

McKinsey Global Institute
Since its founding in 1990, the McKinsey
Global Institute (MGI) has sought to
develop a deeper understanding of the
evolving global economy. As the business
and economics research arm of McKinsey
& Company, MGI aims to provide leaders
in the commercial, public, and social
sectors with the facts and insights
on which to base management and
policy decisions.
MGI research combines the disciplines of
economics and management, employing
the analytical tools of economics with
the insights of business leaders. Our
“micro-to-macro” methodology examines
microeconomic industry trends to better
understand the broad macroeconomic
forces affecting business strategy and
public policy. MGI’s in-depth reports have
covered more than 20 countries and
30 industries. Current research focuses
on six themes: productivity and growth,
natural resources, labor markets, the
evolution of global financial markets,
the economic impact of technology and

innovation, and urbanization. Recent
reports have assessed the digital
economy, the impact of AI and automation
on employment, income inequality,
the productivity puzzle, the economic
benefits of tackling gender inequality,
a new era of global competition,
Chinese innovation, and digital and
financial globalization.
MGI is led by three McKinsey & Company
senior partners: James Manyika,
Sven Smit, and Jonathan Woetzel.
James and Sven also serve as co-chairs
of MGI. Michael Chui, Susan Lund,
Anu Madgavkar, Jan Mischke,
Sree Ramaswamy, Jaana Remes,
Jeongmin Seong, and Tilman Tacke are
MGI partners, and Mekala Krishnan is an
MGI senior fellow.
Project teams are led by the MGI
partners and a group of senior fellows
and include consultants from McKinsey
offices around the world. These teams
draw on McKinsey’s global network of

partners and industry and management
experts. The MGI Council is made
up of leaders from McKinsey offices
around the world and the firm’s sector
practices and includes Michael Birshan,
Andrés Cadena, Sandrine Devillard,
André Dua, Kweilin Ellingrud,
Tarek Elmasry, Katy George, Rajat Gupta,
Eric Hazan, Acha Leke, Gary Pinkus,
Oliver Tonby, and Eckart Windhagen.
The Council members help shape the
research agenda, lead high-impact
research and share the findings with
decision makers around the world. In
addition, leading economists, including
Nobel laureates, advise MGI research.
The partners of McKinsey fund MGI’s
research; it is not commissioned by
any business, government, or other
institution. For further information about
MGI and to download reports for free,
please visit
www.mckinsey.com/mgi.

In collaboration with McKinsey & Company's Sustainability and Global Risk practicies
McKinsey & Company’s Sustainability
Practice helps businesses and
governments reduce risk, manage
disruption, and capture opportunities
in the transition to a low-carbon,
sustainable-growth economy. Clients
benefit from our integrated, systemlevel perspective across industries from
energy and transport to agriculture and
consumer goods and across business
functions from strategy and risk to
operations and digital technology. Our
proprietary research and tech-enabled
tools provide the rigorous fact base
that business leaders and government
policy makers need to act boldly with
confidence. The result: cutting-edge
solutions that drive business-model

advances and enable lasting performance
improvements for new players and
incumbents alike.
www.mckinsey.com/sustainability
McKinsey & Company’s Global Risk
Practice partners with clients to go
beyond managing risk to enhancing
resilience and creating value.
Organizations today face unprecedented
levels and types of risk produced by
a diversity of new sources. These
include technological advances
bringing cybersecurity threats and
rapidly evolving model and data risk;
external shifts such as unpredictable
geopolitical environments and climate
change; and an evolving reputational risk

landscape accelerated and amplified by
social media. We apply deep technical
expertise, extensive industry insights,
and innovative analytical approaches to
help organizations build risk capabilities
and assets across a full range of risk
areas. These include financial risk,
capital and balance sheet–related risk,
nonfinancial risks (including cyber, data
privacy, conduct risk, and financial crime),
compliance and controls, enterprise risk
management and risk culture, model risk
management, and crisis response and
resiliency—with a center of excellence for
transforming risk management through
the use of advanced analytics.
www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/risk

Could climate
become the weak
link in your
supply chain?
Case study
August 2020

Authors
Jonathan Woetzel, Shanghai
Dickon Pinner, San Francisco
Hamid Samandari, New York
Hauke Engel, Frankfurt
Mekala Krishnan, Boston
Claudia Kampel, Stuttgart
Jakob Graabak, Oslo

4

Introduction to case studies
In January 2020, the McKinsey Global Institute published Climate risk and response: Physical
hazards and socioeconomic impacts. In that report, we measured the impact of climate
change by the extent to which it could affect human beings, human-made physical assets,
and the natural world. We explored risks today and over the next three decades and examined
specific cases to understand the mechanisms through which climate change leads to
increased socioeconomic risk. This is one of our case studies, focused on supply chains.
We investigated cases that cover a range of sectors and geographies and provide the basis
of a “micro-to-macro” approach that is a characteristic of McKinsey Global Institute research.
To inform our selection of cases, we considered over 30 potential combinations of climate
hazards, sectors, and geographies based on a review of the literature and expert interviews
on the potential direct impacts of physical climate hazards. We found these hazards affect five
different key socioeconomic systems: livability and workability, food systems, physical assets,
infrastructure services, and natural capital.
We ultimately chose nine cases to reflect these systems and based on their exposure to the
extremes of climate change and their proximity today to key physiological, human-made, and
ecological thresholds (Exhibit 1). As such, these cases represent leading-edge examples of
climate change risk. Each case is specific to a geography and an exposed system, and thus
is not representative of an “average” environment or level of risk across the world. Our cases
show that the direct risk from climate hazards is determined by the severity of the hazard and
its likelihood, the exposure of various “stocks” of capital (people, physical capital, and natural
capital) to these hazards, and the resilience of these stocks to the hazards (for example, the
ability of physical assets to withstand flooding). We typically define the climate state today as
the average conditions between 1998 and 2017, in 2030 as the average between 2021 and
2040, and in 2050 between 2041 and 2060. Through our case studies, we also assess the
knock-on effects that could occur, for example to downstream sectors or consumers. We
primarily rely on past examples and empirical estimates for this assessment of knock-on
effects, which is likely not exhaustive given the complexities associated with socioeconomic
systems. Through this “micro” approach, we offer decision makers a methodology by which to
assess direct physical climate risk, its characteristics, and its potential knock-on impacts.
Climate science makes extensive use of scenarios ranging from lower (Representative
Concentration Pathway 2.6) to higher (RCP 8.5) CO2 concentrations. We have chosen to
focus on RCP 8.5, because the higher-emission scenario it portrays enables us to assess
physical risk in the absence of further decarbonization. Such an “inherent risk” assessment
allows us to understand the magnitude of the challenge and highlight the case for action.
(We also choose a sea level rise scenario for one of our cases that is consistent with the RCP
8.5 trajectory). Our case studies cover each of the five systems we assess to be directly
affected by physical climate risk, across geographies and sectors. While climate change

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

5

will have an economic impact across many sectors, our cases highlight the impact on
construction, agriculture, finance, fishing, tourism, manufacturing, real estate, and a range of
infrastructure-based sectors. The cases include the following:
— For livability and workability, we look at the risk of exposure to extreme heat and humidity
in India and what that could mean for that country’s urban population and outdoor-based
sectors, as well as at the changing Mediterranean climate and how that could affect
sectors such as wine and tourism.
— For food systems, we focus on the likelihood of a multiple-breadbasket failure affecting
wheat, corn, rice, and soy, as well as, specifically in Africa, the impact on wheat and coffee
production in Ethiopia and cotton and corn production in Mozambique.
— For physical assets, we look at the potential impact of storm surge and tidal flooding
on Florida real estate and the extent to which global supply chains, including for
semiconductors and rare earths, could be vulnerable to the changing climate.
— For infrastructure services, we examine 17 types of infrastructure assets, including
the potential impact on coastal cities such as Bristol in England and Ho Chi Minh City
in Vietnam.
— Finally, for natural capital, we examine the potential impacts of glacial melt and runoff
in the Hindu Kush region of the Himalayas; what ocean warming and acidification could
mean for global fishing and the people whose livelihoods depend on it; as well as potential
disturbance to forests, which cover nearly one-third of the world’s land and are key to the
way of life for 2.4 billion people.

6

McKinsey Global Institute

Ex
Exh
hib
ibit
it 1

We have selected nine case studies of leading-edge climate change impacts across all
major geographies, sectors, and affected systems.

7
2
5

1
4

Global case studies
Heat stress1 Low

Livability and workability

Food systems

Physical assets

Infrastructure services

Natural capital

High

3

8

7

6

9

Highest drought risk in 20502

Increase in hurricane/cyclone severity

1

Will India get too hot to work?

2

A Mediterranean basin without a Mediterranean climate?

3

Will the world’s breadbaskets become less reliable?

4

How will African farmers adjust to changing patterns of precipitation?

5

Will mortgages and markets stay afloat in Florida?

6

Could climate become the weak link in your supply chain?

7

Can coastal cities turn the tide on rising flood risk?

8

Will infrastructure bend or break under climate stress?

9

Reduced dividends on natural capital?

1. Heat stress measured in wet-bulb temperatures.
2. Drought risk defined based on time in drought according to Palmer Drought Severity index (PDSI).
Source: Woods Hole Research Center; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

7

Dark, stormy skies, ships and the port of Colon, Panama.
© Jonathan Kingston/National Geographic

Supply chains
Could climate become the weak link in your supply chain?
Much of global economic production is organized around a complex system of interdependent
supply chains. Supply chains facilitate the production of everything from computers and
cars to lifesaving medicines and food, and support world trade in goods that is worth almost
$20 trillion annually.1 End products may have up to many thousands of parts, sourced from
diverse geographies around the world. Over time, these supply chains have been honed to
deliver maximum efficiency and speed.
But questions about supply chain risks and resilience are now being raised in the context
of the global Covid-19 pandemic as well as acute weather events.2 A changing climate and
the greater frequency and/or severity of hazards may increase disruptions in supply chains
that interrupt production, raise costs, hurt corporate revenues, and lead to higher prices
or shortages for consumers. According to a recent Allianz survey of companies, business
interruptions are the number-one risk facing the corporate sector today. 3 A similar poll by the
World Economic Forum found natural catastrophes as the greatest concern for businesses
in East Asia and the Pacific. 4 Hurricanes and floods contribute to the majority of economic
losses in natural disasters, accounting for 50 percent and 20 percent of total losses since
2000, respectively. 5
In this case study, we examine how risks from climate hazards, already present in global
supply chains, are likely to evolve over the next few decades. We focus specifically on the
risk from hurricanes and extreme precipitation and find that supply chains can be disrupted
in different ways. For example, access to plants or production at plants can be shut down
or production of critical inputs or access to them can be disrupted, impacting production
downstream and potentially increasing prices to manufacturers and consumers. We identify
three broad types of supply chains that illustrate how climate risks vary across a spectrum:
specialty, intermediate, and commodity. Typically, the more specialized the supply chain, the
more severe the impact for a downstream player could be as supply of a critical input may only
be available from the source that has been disrupted. However, the more commoditized the
supply chain is, the larger the number of downstream players that may be affected by spiking
prices from a sudden reduction in supply.
For a deeper appreciation of the extent of risks, we focus on two supply chains that illustrate
how disruption may play out. As an example of specialty supply chains, we examine the
semiconductor industry; for commodity supply chains, heavy rare earth metals. Both create
critical inputs for advanced industries. Semiconductor chips are ubiquitous in electronics from
computers to smartphones to electronic watches. Rare earths are critical in aerospace and
defense, electric vehicles, wind turbines, drones, medical appliances, and other electronics.
Both supply chains are highly geographically concentrated in regions with an increasing
probability of relevant climate hazards. However, these are only examples illustrating
broader trends.

1
2

3
4
5

World Trade Statistical Review, 2018. See also Globalization in transition: The future of trade and global value chains,
McKinsey Global Institute, January 2019.
Recent MGI research examines how industry value chains are exposed to a broader set of risks, including climate events.
This work also examines vulnerabilities within specific companies and broader value chains, financial losses, and ways to
bolster resilience. See Risk, resilience, and rebalancing in global value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, August 2020.
Allianz Risk Barometer 2019, Allianz, January 2019.
World Economic Forum, Regional risks for doing business 2019, World Trade Organization, 2019.
NatCatSERVICE, Munich Re, 2019.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

9

Assessing the inherent risk to supply chains without any adaptation action and based on an
RCP 8.5 scenario, the probability of a hurricane occurring that is severe enough to disrupt
semiconductor manufacturing (defined as a hurricane with more rainfall than manufacturing
assets typically are designed to withstand) could increase from 1 percent per annum currently
to 2 to 4 percent by 2040 across much of the western Pacific.6 Increase in hurricane wind
hazard is less homogenous but is projected to increase from 1 percent per annum currently up
to 2 percent by 2040 in some parts of Taiwan and Japan. In other words, risk of a disruptive
hurricane could be expected to approximately double.7 We estimate that in this scenario, such
hurricanes could lead to months of lost production for the directly affected player and could
cause up to 35 percent revenue loss for unprepared downstream players in a disaster year. In
the case of rare earths, we find that the likelihood of extreme rainfall in any given year which
is sufficient to trigger mine and road closures could roughly double by 2030 in southeastern
China. This could reduce global production by 20 percent in a disaster year. 8
Global supply chains could adapt to manage these risks. For semiconductor supply chains,
two key areas of adaptation include building disaster-proof plants (for producers) and raising
inventory levels in order to continue production even if a supply chain is interrupted (for
downstream players). We find that building disaster-proof plants means additional costs of
roughly 2 percent of the building costs, which equals an additional $20 million for an average
plant. Raising the inventory to provide a meaningful buffer in case of supply disruption, with
estimated costs for warehousing and working capital, may increase input costs by less than
a percent.
Companies using rare earths could protect themselves from climate-change-induced
physical risk by raising inventory levels at the costs of additional working capital and storage
space needed. Rare earth miners could, for example, by using leaches that decrease the
risk of landslides or moving leach holes away from the steepest slopes.9 We estimate these
measures could lead to a cost of goods sold (COGS) increase of less than 5 percent.

Supply chains are already being disrupted by extreme weather, and this
risk will increase with climate change
Floods, storms, drought, and fires are all climate hazards that have already disrupted supply
chains in recent years, halting production and resulting in lost revenues and profits. While
this case study focuses on the impact of storms and floods, drought can also impact supply
chains (See Box 1, “How drought can affect supply chains”). As climate change makes extreme
weather more frequent and/or severe, it increases the annual probability of events that are
more intense than manufacturing assets are constructed to withstand, and supply chain
disruptions become more common.

6

7

8
9

10

If not indicated differently, we follow standard practice and define current and future (2030, 2050) states as average
climatic behavior over multidecade periods. Climate state today is defined as average conditions between 1998 and 2017,
in 2030 as average between 2021 and 2040, and in 2050 as average between 2041 and 2060. For the analysis of 2040,
the average of 2031 and 2050 was used. Also, if not indicated differently, the climatological analyses in this case use
RCP 8.5 to represent the changes in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations that could occur absent a mitigation
response. Please see technical appendix of the full report for details.
Woods Hole Research Center analysis drawing on: Kerry Emanuel, The Coupled Hurricane Intensity Prediction System
(CHIPS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019; Water and Climate Resilience Center, RAND Corporation. While
total hurricane frequency is expected to remain unchanged or to decrease slightly under increased global warming,
cumulative hurricane rainfall rates, average intensity, and proportion of storms that reach Category 4 or 5 intensity are
projected to rise, even for an increase of two degrees Celsius or less in global average temperatures. Thomas Knutson et
al., “Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II. Projected response to anthropogenic warming,” Bulletin of
the American Meteorological Society, 2019.
Probability increases from approximately 2 percent per year in 1965 to approximately 2.5 percent currently,
approximately 4 percent in 2030, and approximately 6 percent in 2050.
Heavy rare earths are mined in open-pit clay mines using an in situ leaching technique, making them sensitive to extreme
rainfall. Shallow holes of a few meters are dug, and hydrochloric acid leach is sprayed over the clay. The acid acts as an
extraction agent; after 150 to 400 days, leach containing heavy rare earths has concentrated in the leach holes. This
leach is then brought to a treatment pond, where a precipitation agent (such as ammonium bicarbonate) is applied,
causing the heavy rare earth to form roughly 92 percent grade rare earth oxides that accumulate at the bottom of the
solution.

McKinsey Global Institute

Box 1.

How drought can affect supply chains
Drought has already impacted supply chains across the world. In Europe, for example,
drought has had a significant impact on the flow of goods through waterways. In the
third quarter of 2018, transport on the Rhine was down 27 percent year on year due to
low water levels. Transport performance was also 10 percent lower on the Danube.1 This
resulted in a 10 percent drop in Germany’s production of chemicals and pharmaceuticals
from September to November, as major industrial players shut down plants that
were unable to secure raw material, reporting in some instances over $220 million in
additional logistics costs. The Panama Canal, which shortens the 8,000-mile journey
around Cape Horn to just 48 miles, is already having to reduce weight on ships due to
reduced water levels in drought conditions.2 Similarly, along the Mississippi River in
the United States, both floods and droughts have disrupted logistics and agricultural
production over the past decade. 3 A tow on the upper Mississippi River typically has 15
barges, each capable of carrying more than 1,000 tons. A one-inch drop in river level
can reduce tow capacity by 255 tons. 4

1
2
3
4

Holly Ellyatt, “A major river in Europe hit by drought could create economic havoc,” CNBC, July 31, 2019.
“Climate change threatens the Panama Canal,” Economist, September 21, 2019. Henry Fountain, “What Panama’s
Worst Drought Means for Its Canal’s Future”, New York Times, May 17, 2019.
Karl Plume, “Floods stall fertilizer shipments in latest blow to U.S. farmers,” Reuters, April 25, 2019; Debbie
Elliott, “Drought causes ripple effect along mighty Mississippi River,” NPR, January 23, 2013.
“U.S. Energy Sector Vulnerabilities to Climate Change and Extreme Weather,” US Department of Energy, 2013.

Extreme events that exceed the design threshold of physical assets can cause major supply
chain disruptions. One of the costliest floods in the past decade occurred in Thailand in
2011. Flood defenses that were supposed to keep industrial facilities dry broke and became
overwhelmed by extreme rain, disrupting production of food, automobiles, and consumer
electronics and raising prices for consumers (See Box 2, “What happened in Thailand in
2011 when the floods hit?”). Design thresholds vary but are typically defined to be tolerant
up to a specific magnitude of event, which in turn has a specific frequency or likelihood
associated with it (often referred to as the historical return period of the event). Common
design thresholds for manufacturing assets are typically in the range of 1 to 2 percent
probability events (also known as “100-year” and “50-year” events, respectively), depending
on what is required either by local regulations or by reinsurers.10
As climate change makes extreme weather more frequent and/or severe, it increases the
annual probability of events that are more intense than manufacturing assets are constructed
to withstand and supply chain disruptions become more common.
Research suggests that thunderstorm conditions will become more frequent due to climate
change, and furthermore that hurricane rainfall, average intensity, and proportion of storms
that reach Category 4 or 5 will increase, magnifying disruption risk for manufacturing in Asia
and along the US Gulf Coast.11

10
11

Based on expert interviews.
Noah S. Diffenbaugh, Martin Scherer, and Robert J. Trapp, “Robust increases in severe thunderstorm environments in
response to greenhouse forcing,” PNAS, Volume 10, October 8, 2013; Resilinc, EventWatch annual reports, 2014–18;
Thomas Knutson et al., Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II. Projected response to anthropogenic
warming, American Meteorological Society, 2019.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

11

Box 2.

What happened in Thailand in 2011 when the floods hit?
In 2011, Thailand suffered the worst
flooding in 50 years with many
regions under 3 meters of water
at peak severity, inundating entire
provinces in the industrial areas near
Bangkok.1 Flooding lasted 30 to
60 days, disrupted global electronics,
automotive and food supply chains, and
resulted in losses totaling $40 billion
to $50 billion.2 The impact on local
industry was severe; industrial output
in Thailand dropped almost 50 percent
in November 2011 compared with
the previous year. Manufacturing
accounted for 70 percent of damages
and losses, representing about onethird of manufacturing value added
in Thailand at the time. 3 While climate
attribution studies broadly suggest
no link of the Thai floods to climate
change, they are a good illustrative
example of how increasing frequency
of extreme events can threaten specific
supply chains. 4
There were several factors that made
the impact from these floods so severe:
— Production was concentrated in a
high-hazard region: Thailand has
a “supercluster strategy,” where
incentives such as tax breaks,
grants, infrastructure upgrades,
workforce support, etc. encourage
the colocation of academia,
research, and multiple industries.
As a result, manufacturing is
concentrated in a few estates in
the Chao Praya river basin (which
has extreme precipitation in the
monsoon season) near Bangkok.

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

12

— Resilience was insufficient: Flood
defenses in industrial estates could
not withstand the flood, and either
broke or were overrun.
— Reconstruction took time:
The most resilient small and
medium-size enterprises (SMEs)
in manufacturing returned to
business after only one to three
months, almost as soon as the
floodwaters receded. Larger firms,
took three to five months to restart
production as they were using more
advanced equipment with longer
replacement times, which delayed
recovery. The least resilient SMEs
had even longer delays and higher
levels of bankruptcy, reflecting a
lower financial capacity to tolerate
outages. By June 1, 2012, seven to
eight months after the onset of the
floods, 70 percent of Thai factories
were restored or partly restored,
20 percent were not yet restored,
and 5 to 10 percent of factories had
shut down permanently as a result
of the floods. 5 Even a year after the
floods, utilization of Thai electronics
SME facilities was still only at
40 percent.
There were significant knock-on effects
globally in key supply chains. The
electronics and automotive industries
were hardest hit and experienced an
80 percent year-on-year decline in
production in November.6 While the
automotive sector returned to positive
growth after four months, recovery for
the electronics industry took longer

and year-on-year growth was still
negative seven months after the onset
of the floods.
Japanese manufacturers in the
electronics and automotive industries
were particularly affected as they were
sourcing large parts of their inputs from
Thailand. Most of the manufacturing
facilities of the suppliers to Japanese
automotive companies were disrupted
for only one to three months; however,
some factories were closed for up to
six months, as plants were critically
damaged and needed significant repairs.
In total, car manufacturers produced at
least 750,000 fewer cars because of the
flood. Car manufacturers with smaller
inventories, concentrated supply, and a
long recovery time were more affected
than others.7
Prices of hard disk drives (HDD), the key
product segment in the Thai electronics
industry, spiked 80 to 190 percent
(reflecting different products) as up to
40 percent of global HDD production
capacity was flooded, with prices
remaining elevated for more than a
year. 8 Industries downstream of and
adjacent to HDD manufacturing were
affected unevenly; the share prices
of a major computer manufacturer
fell 5 percent, while share prices for
a manufacturer of solid state disks
(SSDs), a substitute product, rose
5 percent.9 This illustrates that while
downstream players suffer when
suppliers are disrupted, producers of
substitute products may actually gain a
temporary competitive advantage.

Royal Thai Government and World Bank, Thai flood 2011: Rapid assessment for resilient recovery and reconstruction planning, 2012; Surapong Sarapa, The status
of current meteorological alert of Thailand, Regional Workshop on Impact-Based Forecasts in RA II (Asia), Seoul, Korea, November 7–9, 2017, wmo.int/pages/
prog/amp/pwsp/documents/2-2-1_SurapongSARAPA_Thailand.pdf.
Christophe Courbage, Meghan Orie, and Walter R. Stahel. “Thai floods and insurance.” The Geneva Reports, 2012.
T. W. Bank, “Thai Flood 2011: Rapid assessment for resilient recovery and reconstruction planning.” Bangkok: The World Bank, 2012.
See for example, Thomas C. Peterson, Peter A. Stott, and Stephanie Herring, “Explaining extreme events of 2011 from a climate perspective,” Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society, July 2012, Volume 93, Number 7.
Masahiko Haraguchi and Upmanu Lall, “Flood risks and impacts: A case study of Thailand’s floods in 2011 and research questions for supply chain decision making,”
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, December 2015, Volume 14, Part 3.
David S. H. Rosenthal et al., The economics of long-term digital storage, Stanford University, September 2012.
Bank of Thailand; Masahiko Haraguchi and Upmanu Lall, “Flood risks and impacts: A case study of Thailand’s floods in 2011 and research questions for supply chain
decision making,” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, December 2015, Volume 14, Part 3.
Ibid.
“Thai floods hit global hard drive production,” Financial Times, October 20, 2011.

McKinsey Global Institute

The risk of disruption has increased as supply chains have become
optimized for efficiency rather than resiliency
Increasingly global and efficient supply chains have underpinned economic growth and
productivity improvements over the past few decades. However, the drive for efficiency and
the resulting greater complexity and intricacy have increased the vulnerability of supply
chains to disruption.
Changes in inventory levels contribute to increased vulnerability. Since lean manufacturing
gained popularity in the 1970s, with Just-in-Time and Just-in-Sequence production,
companies have been striving to reduce metrics like inventory levels. Lower inventories
reduce working capital, but also reduce supply chain resilience as the leanest companies
are most reliant on receiving inputs from their suppliers on time. One industry where it is
very costly to hold large inventories is aerospace, because parts like an airplane fuselage
are so big. This also applies to some commodities, like the petrochemical gas ethylene,
which either takes up a large amount of space or needs expensive pressurized containers;
only a few days of ethylene inventory exists, and much of it is in transit in tankers or
pipelines. Large inventories are also expensive in the semiconductor industry, because
rapid innovation cycles cause inventory to depreciate fast.
Vulnerability is also exacerbated by changes in production strategy. To achieve economies
of scale, suppliers often only have one production site with the necessary technology to
produce the goods they are making. For example, in a 2018 survey, 88 percent of suppliers
across industries responded that they have only one production site available for each of
their products. This was especially true in aerospace and defense and pharmaceuticals,
where high safety requirements and long lead times to acquire regulatory approval increase
the cost of new manufacturing facilities.12 Very specific requirements for production
conditions (for example, in pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, or automotive) also mean that
even small changes in the manufacturing environment can create production disruptions.
Furthermore, these specific requirements make it harder to quickly get new sources of
input during a disaster. For example, Hurricane Maria in 2017 created a shortage of saline
bags in the United States as 40 percent of saline bags are produced in Puerto Rico, which
suffered a power outage for 90 days following the hurricane. Strict requirements for the
sterility of the manufacturing environment prevented other manufacturers from rapidly
stepping in to compensate for lost capacity.13 There are also examples of raw materials that
require specific natural conditions, like lithium. Lithium is extracted by drying lithium brine
in an evaporation pond for two years in areas with very low precipitation. However, shifting
weather patterns are already interfering with this process as historically dry regions in Chile
have experienced torrential rainfalls over the past few years, reducing lithium output.14
In some instances, production has also become more concentrated in regions with high
climate hazards. With the goal of maximizing returns, companies have shifted manufacturing
production centers to areas with preferable operating characteristics. Historically, this was
in part due to labor arbitrage, but more recently, another driver has been to co-locate in
specialized clusters.15 However, many of these areas are more susceptible to climate hazards.
We identify two aspects of increased globalization that may be increasing climate risk in
supply chains.

12
13
14
15

EventWatch 2018 annual report, Resilinc, 2019.
Philip J. Palin et al., Supply chain resilience and the 2017 hurricane season, CNA Corporation, 2018.
Ernest Scheyder, “Albemarle’s lithium sales drop after Chilean rains,” Reuters, May 8, 2019.
Globalization in transition: The future of trade and value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2019.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

13

Firstly, the value of trade in goods as a proportion of all economic activity has increased
from 10 percent in 1960, peaking at 25 percent in 2008 and then retreating to 23 percent in
2018.16 This means that supply chains are more exposed to climate hazards from all over the
world. This particularly applies to companies that assemble specialized manufactured goods
containing many thousands of parts, like consumer electronics companies or automotive
and airplane OEMs, as they require reliable inputs of a broad range of specialized parts
that often are sourced from many different locations. The increased trade intensity also
increases reliance on functional infrastructure services (for example, ports, rails, roads, and
airports). Logistical infrastructure is often less well defended than manufacturing assets.
Chronic flooding can cause regular short infrastructure interruptions of days or weeks. Even if
businesses can absorb these interruptions, they can still add costs to production (for example,
cost of relying on a private power generator), disproportionately affect small businesses (who
typically lack the ability to run to private infrastructure services). The cost of self-generation
is typically three times larger than that supplied from the grid.17 Acute tail events can cause
significant damage to infrastructure systems, resulting in longer service outages that may
cause bankruptcy to even larger and more prepared businesses.
Secondly, economic activity has moved to higher-hazard countries, on average. For example,
in 2018, countries with high hurricane hazard contributed 45 percent of global value of traded
goods compared with 40 percent in 1991.18 Some industries are particularly concentrated
in one region, driven by a focus on regional competitive advantage and the self-reinforcing
effects of regional ecosystems. These industries have higher volume of output at risk, as a
significant share of the global supply capacity can be disrupted simultaneously. For instance,
40 percent or more of global refinery capacity of metals like copper, cobalt, and aluminum is
in China.
Production asset resilience has generally increased with improved technology, increased
regulatory pressure for safety, and higher capital expenditures increasing value at risk and
so incentivizing increased investments. However, this is partly offset by an increase in the
requirements of the manufacturing environment—for example, moisture, temperature, or dust
levels in manufacturing areas due to requirements from regulations or advanced automated
technology. Automation in industries like automotive and semiconductors has grown rapidly.
Automated manufacturing robots often are less resilient than laborers in several ways: some
robots may be damaged by dust and moisture levels that workers can tolerate; repairs of
specialized machines may take several months; and power consumed by the robots makes
it necessary to install more emergency power to continue operations. Industries in rapid
growth (like cobalt, lithium, medical appliances, or industrial robotics) may also experience
“growth pains” like tight inventories and high utilization rates, further increasing climate risk.
If the growth is fueled by high innovation rates, then leading-edge technology will be less
commoditized, and fewer suppliers will be available to ramp up if one is disrupted. Therefore,
some of the fastest growing and most technically advanced and innovative industries may be
the most at risk and so the most in need of adaptation.

16
17
18

14

Ibid.
Stephane Hallegatte, Jun Rentschler, and Julie Rozenberg, Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity, World
Bank, July 2019.
World Bank; Woods Hole Research Center.

McKinsey Global Institute

We identify three broad types of supply chains based on varying risk
characteristics of downstream disruption from climate change
We identify a spectrum of supply chains to help assess the nature of climate risk that
companies may face. These include specialty and commodity at either end and intermediate
in the middle (Supply chain‑1).
Specialty
In specialty supply chains, OEMs typically secure their inputs through long-term contracts
or strategic collaborations with suppliers. Critical supplies may even be secured internally
if players are vertically integrated. Suppliers may have unique manufacturing equipment
that is designed specifically to produce the components of their customers. The necessary
technology may exist in only one or a handful of manufacturing plants in the world. A good
example is leading-edge semiconductors (see below for more details on semiconductor
supply chains). In the supply chain of semiconductors, a supply disruption could lead to
long production disruptions for downstream players, up to a year in extreme cases. The end
products are designed for specific inputs, which means that inputs with different designs—for
example, a microcontroller from another supplier—may change the functionality of the end
product. If a supplier is disrupted, a downstream player without access to the usual inputs
would have to requalify their product with their customers, using different inputs. As the
alternative input would have somewhat different properties, this could require a full redesign
of the product, which is typically not a viable strategy.
Therefore, downstream players are reliant on getting the specific inputs they have planned
for. Manufacturing of these inputs requires specific, advanced, and costly equipment. This
machinery typically exists in only one to five locations around the world, due to economies of
scale.19 Even if several machines exist, utilization may already be near 100 percent, preventing
unaffected suppliers from scaling up if one of the machines breaks.20 Therefore, the machines
must be replaced before production can resume. As this equipment is costly and specialized,
it is manufactured on-demand, which typically takes several months. Specialized industries
are thus often in turn reliant on another specialized supply chain, compounding downtimes.
Additionally, industries like semiconductor equipment already have a production backlog of
several months, driving the equipment replacement time up to a total of 6 to 12 months for
some manufacturing devices.21 During the production disruption, the players downstream
of the disrupted supplier are likely unable to maintain production unless they have access to
alternative sources of inputs.
Intermediate
Intermediate supply chains are between specialty and commodity in their characteristics.
Bilateral supply relationships are common but are shorter-term and of a less strategic nature
than for the specialty supply chains. It is typically cheap for customers to switch suppliers, and
several suppliers offer goods of comparable quality. Examples include standardized or lower
quality chips; airplane interiors (for example, seats); and niche commodity chemicals. The
less specialized the supply chain is, the easier it will be for unaffected suppliers to take over
for a supplier that is disrupted. Therefore, downstream players will have to compete for the
remaining supply capacity.

19
20
21

World fab forecast, SEMI, September 2019.
McKinsey Semiconductor Practice expert interviews.
Ibid.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

15

Case study

Supply chain-1

Supply chains face different knock-on effects from production disruption
depending on the degree of commoditization.
Strength of impact

Illustrative

Player directly affected by the disaster
Low

High

Player experiencing negative knock-on effects
Player experiencing competitive advantage

Specialty

Examples

Suppliers

Airplane fuselages, specialty
drugs, high-end CPU chips,
leading-edge optoelectronics

S1

C1

S2

C2

S3

C3

S1

C1

S2

C2

S3

C3

S1

C1

S2

C2

RAM chips, generic
automotive parts (e.g., car
tires), hard disk drives,
airplane interiors (e.g., seats)

Metals (e.g., rare earths),
oil and gas, petrochemicals
(e.g., ethylene)

Customers

Market

S3
Commodity
Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis

16

McKinsey Global Institute

C3

Commodity
In commoditized supply chains, downstream players acquire their inputs on a commodity
trading exchange or via commodity brokers, and there is typically no direct bilateral
relationship between the supplier and the customer. Products are standardized, and
several suppliers are selling goods of comparable quality. Heavy rare earths are an example
of a commoditized supply chain (see below for more details on heavy rare earth supply
chains). Rare earth producers sell their product to brokers who resell it to industries that
use rare earths in the production of EV batteries or specialized electronics.22 Therefore, all
downstream players would be affected by the supply disruption as prices would rise. The
effects of Hurricane Harvey caused US steam cracker utilization rates to drop by more than
20 percent between August and September 2017. Ethylene prices increased over 25 percent
during this period.23
To better illustrate what happens due to disruptions in supply chains, we consider two
examples of supply chains at the bookends of this distribution.

The probability of a hurricane of sufficient intensity to disrupt
semiconductor supply chains may grow two to four times by 2040
As an example of a specialty supply chain, we analyze supply chains for semiconductor
manufacturing, more than a $400 billion industry.24 By 2040, a company using leading-edge
chips (for example, with applications in memory, logic, communication, or optoelectronics) such
as an automotive OEM, sourcing from geographies in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, or other hubs in
the western Pacific, can expect that hurricanes sufficient to disrupt their suppliers will become
two to four times more likely.25 Some of these disruptions may last for several months. This has
implications for many industries as chips are increasingly critical to the modern economy. For
example, electrical content in cars increased from 2 percent in 1960 to 35 percent in 2010.26
Several stages of the supply chain are highly concentrated in Asia–Pacific, including:
— Raw material, for example, wafer and chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) slurry
— Chip manufacturing in segments within different application areas, for example, logical
components like CPUs, communication technologies like 5G, memory technologies
like RAM
— Chip packaging
— Chip assembly, creating specialized electronic circuitry for automotive, consumer tech,
and industrial electronics, for example
More than 50 percent of chip foundry production capacity of about 45 nanometer or smaller
chips (typically focused on logic chips) is concentrated in ~15 facilities (factory modules)
in Taiwan. About 98 percent of manufacturing capacity of 350 nanometer and smaller
optoelectronic chips (for example, used in image sensors, lasers, LEDs) is in nine facilities in
southern Japan, and about 40 percent of memory chip capacity is in ten facilities in Seoul and
surrounding cities.27 A product using such chips will typically be reliant on many parts working
at the same time. Therefore, a supply disruption in any one component category (for example,
memory) may lead to many downstream production disruptions. The downstream assembled
product will sell at a price higher than the sum of its components, and may be 100 times or

22
23
24
25
26
27

Nawshad Haque et al., “Rare earth elements: Overview of mining, mineralogy, uses, sustainability and environmental
impact,” Resources, October 2014, Volume 3, Number 4, mdpi.com/2079-9276/3/4/614/htm.
IHS Markit Economics and Country Risk.
Arne Holst, Semiconductor industry sales worldwide 1987-2020, Statista, Jan 7, 2020.
McKinsey Global Institute analysis; Woods Hole Research Center.
McKinsey Automotive Practice expert interviews.
World fab forecast, SEMI, September 2019.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

17

even several thousand times the price of any individual part. For this reason, the disrupted
gross output from an extreme weather event may become much larger if disruptions cascade
through supply chains.
Hurricane intensity can be measured in wind speeds, using the Saffir-Simpson scale, or in
precipitation, measured in millimeters of precipitation per event, or precipitation over a time
period. High wind speeds can be a hazard directly to vulnerable structures (for example,
distribution power cables) or by causing storm surge that inundates coastal infrastructure and
properties. Precipitation can directly harm sensitive manufacturing assets, particularly if the
building exterior is already damaged by high wind speed, and cause flooding or landslides.
This analysis keeps exposure constant to highlight how much climatic factors are driving risk.
In other words, it assumes the distribution of facilities in 2040 is largely similar to today, which
can be considered a “business as usual” scenario on the basis of clustering effects discussed
in the introduction. Facility owners may decide to take action and relocate future or indeed
current facilities. This analysis shows what the inherent risk is and how to best manage it.
The increase in annual probability of hurricanes with extreme precipitation is driven primarily
by an increase in temperature driving increased water-carrying capacity of hurricanes.28 This
increased water-carrying capacity leads both to more intense rainfall (measured in millimeters
per day), and longer-lasting rainfalls. Moreover, hurricanes could move slower, making
rainfall last even longer in each location. Both the increase in intensity and duration of rainfall
increase the risk of landslides and risk of rainwater directly contaminating the manufacturing
assets. Increased rainfall intensity contributes more to increased flooding hazard than longer
duration does. The reason is that the longer duration increases the opportunity for runoff,
softening the severity of floods, compared with storms with similar total rainfall levels but over
shorter durations.
We analyzed hurricanes with a 1 percent annual probability of occurring in each location,
based on cumulative event rainfall. With increasingly severe storms, events that currently
have a 1 percent probability of occurring could become two to three times as common by
2040 across ten major semiconductor hubs, under an RCP 8.5 scenario (Supply chain‑2).
In Taiwan, this means that cities like Hsinchu, Taichung, and Tainan could see hurricanes
with 1,500- to 2,500-millimeter precipitation or more approximately twice to three times as
often, depending on the specific location.29 In Japan, precipitation levels for these events
range from 500 millimeters in Tokyo to 950 millimeters in Kirishima, on the southern tip of the
main islands. This is more than the recent Typhoon Jebi, which MunichRE’s NatCat database
estimates is the costliest hurricane to date in the western Pacific. 30 The precipitation from a
1 percent hurricane precipitation hazard in Korea is much lower, only 100 to 150 millimeters
of rainfall near Seoul, but this is where the increase in annual probability is highest—up to
four times. 31

28

29

30
31

18

Thomas Knutson et al., “Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II. Projected response to anthropogenic
warming,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 2019; Geert Jan van Oldenborgh et al., “Attribution of extreme
rainfall from Hurricane Harvey, August 2017,” Environmental Research Letters, December 2017, Volume 12, Number 12.
This is higher than the 1,539 millimeters of rainfall observed in the US during Hurricane Harvey; Harvey was the wettest
tropical cyclone on record in the United States and resulting flood waters, combined with wind speeds, caused damages
of $100 billion. Munich Re, NatCatSERVICE, 2019. Jack F. Williams and Ch’ang-yi David Chang, Taiwan’s Environmental
Struggle Toward a green silicon island, Routledge 2008.
Munich Re, NatCatSERVICE, 2019.
Kerry Emanuel, The Coupled Hurricane Intensity Prediction System (CHIPS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
2019; Water and Climate Resilience Center, RAND Corporation. Woods Hole Research Center.

McKinsey Global Institute

Case study

Supply chain-2

Semiconductor manufacturing hubs in the Western Pacific are expected
to experience disruptive extreme hurricanes two to three times as often
by 2040 compared to today.
Rainfall during historical 1-in-100 year hurricanes (with
potential to disrupt production, as assets are typically
engineered to withstand up to 1-in-100 year events)1
Millimeters per hurricane

Based on RCP 8.5

Semiconductor
market segment
Opto- Foundry Memory
electronic
>25
Global
market 16–25
share2
11–15
%
≤10
≤20
≤50
≤100
≤250
≤500
≤1,000
≤1,500
≤2,000
>2,000

Change in frequency of hurricanes of this intensity by 2040
Historical = 1

≤1.00
1.01–1.25
1.26–1.75
1.76–2.25
2.26–3.00
>3.00

1. Hurricanes with 100-year historical return period, using 1980–2000 as reference period.
2. Global market share of each hub in given product segment (e.g., foundry for 26% of chips of <47mm size globally concentrated in Tainan).
Note: See the Technical Appendix for why we chose RCP 8.5. All projections based on RCP 8.5, CMIP 5 multimodel ensemble.
Source: Woods Hole Research Center; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

19

Change in wind speed evolution is also expected to be uneven across geographies.
Hurricanes with annual probability of 1 percent today, based on maximum wind speed, will
reach 1.25 to 2 percent annual probability in some locations by 2040, like western Taiwan and
southwestern Japan. But there are winners as well as losers—such hurricanes are also set to
decrease to 0.7 percent in parts of Korea and the Philippines. For exposed locations in Taiwan
or Japan that see an increase, the historical 1 percent probability storm is either a category
4 or 5, with wind speeds above about 200 kilometers per hour. 32
There are three drivers of near-term losses for suppliers that are hit by such events, potentially
leading to losses of up to 200 percent of annual profit and 35 percent of revenues: physical
damages to assets, including facilities, production equipment, and inventories; reduced
sales, either because production is disrupted or because goods cannot be shipped to the
market; and higher costs in the reconstruction phase and after the plant is back in production,
as market prices of labor, energy, and logistics may spike following a disaster (as seen in
the 2011 Thai floods). The combination of these impacts may also limit suppliers’ ability to
quickly and efficiently restore production, by reducing their ability to raise capital for repairs
or by choking short-term cash flow and presenting unusual operational obstacles. However,
these effects can be partly mitigated if manufacturers hold disaster insurance, have asset
hardening or tighter design standards, or if the government offers disaster support.
Semiconductor supply could be reduced by an extreme hurricane in several ways. First,
common losses during extreme events include loss of infrastructure services, for example due
to flooding of roads near the facilities preventing workers from accessing the facility, power
grid outages, or closures of ports and airports.
Second, direct damages to manufacturing assets are rarer, and historically direct damages
have been minor. For instance, building exteriors may experience minor damages from
wind pressure, water, or physical objects, but in itself, this is unlikely to lead to a production
disruption. Other damages that have been observed in the past include damages to raw
materials, work in progress inventory and finished chips, as well as unplanned shutdowns
that may require rebooting the production robotics and requalifying that conditions in the
manufacturing environment (for example, dust levels, humidity, temperature) are within
required limits. This could disrupt several weeks and potentially months of production,
particularly if the manufacturing area is contaminated by water, dust, or moisture that
damages large amounts of inventory. These damages contributed to the slow recoveries
following the 2011 Thai floods.
Third, damages to the internal power system, building main structure, or specialized
manufacturing equipment could be particularly costly as it could cause up to or beyond a
full year of supply disruptions. For this reason, suppliers invest in making these parts of
the factory particularly resilient. For instance, suppliers may have two connections to the
central power grid, each sufficient to supply the plant with enough power on its own if the
other should break. The manufacturing area clean rooms containing the manufacturing
devices are typically placed on the upper floors to prevent any flooding. The clean rooms
are often protected by an additional inner shell. If factories are flooded during the extreme
weather, the manufacturing devices may be moved to particularly robust safe rooms to
ensure that they are unharmed.

32

20

Woods Hole Research Center Analysis, drawing from: Kerry Emanuel, The Coupled Hurricane Intensity Prediction
System (CHIPS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019. National Hurricane Center and Central Pacific Hurricane
Center, Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale.

McKinsey Global Institute

We find that a severe supply disruption can cause cascading production disruptions
downstream, particularly for unprepared players (Supply chain‑3). Using a hypothetical
example, we estimate that downstream players could lose up to a third of annual revenue if
supply is disrupted for an illustrative period of five months, a duration seen in some of the
more severely disrupted players in the 2011 Thai floods. This could be the case if no alternative
source or substitute was able to keep supply going (beyond a minimal inventory of finished
goods) and if no measures had been taken to limit losses from disrupted downstream
production (for example, insurance or negotiations with customers to delay supply).
A well-prepared player, on the other hand, may only lose about 5 percent of revenue in a similar
event. Preparations may include dual sourcing (so only 50 percent of supply is lost), increasing
supplier resiliency through due diligence and collaboration with suppliers on asset hardening;
this can limit the recovery time to less than one month. Several other actions can help further
reduce the losses, including insurance, even faster recovery through best practice emergency
procedures, and discounted cross-selling of substitute products (for example, premium models
or older product versions) to end consumers. These adaptations come with a cost that needs to
be considered, but many of these investments may be smaller than the loss avoided.
Adaptation areas for semiconductor supply chains include two key areas: building disasterproof plants (for producers) and raising inventory levels in order to continue production even
if a supply chain is interrupted (for downstream players). We find that building disaster-proof
plants means additional costs of roughly 2 percent of the building costs which equals an
additional $20 million for an average plant. Raising the inventory to provide a meaningful
buffer in case of supply disruption, with estimated costs for warehousing and working capital,
could increase input costs by less than a percent.
The value of preparedness can be even higher if the supply disruption happens before a new
product launch. In consumer electronics, product global change: life cycles are short, with
new smartphone models being launched every year, and product lifetimes rarely exceeding
five years. If product launch is delayed by five months, the technology may be outdated shortly
thereafter, and competitors may gain a significant advantage.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

21

Case study

Supply chain-3

Being prepared for extreme weather impacts can minimize supply chain disruptions.
In the case of disruption to the semiconductor supply chain, an unprepared downstream company
could lose about 35% of annual revenue while preparation limits the loss to about 5%.
Effect of disruption from 100-year hurricane on
upstream semiconductor manufacturer
Impact on earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT),
% of normal year revenues

Illustrative

Normal year

Normal year revenues

100

Disaster year—
low-impact scenario
Disaster year—
high-impact scenario

-70

Normal year costs
Normal year EBIT

30

Damaged assets write-down:
plant, equipment, inventory1
EBIT impact from lost sales2
Disefficiencies in logistics,
labor, basic supplies3
EBIT in disaster year

-45

-30
-10
-55

Effect of disruption from 100-year hurricane on
downstream electronics player4
% of normal year revenues

Normal year
Hypothetical disaster year

An unprepared player could lose
~35% of revenues in a disaster year
Normal year
revenues

100

Lost sales from
disrupted supply
Sales based
on safety stock
Disaster year
revenues

A well-prepared player would lose much less,
even in a disaster year

40
5

100
15
10

65

95
-35%

5-month disruption of 100% of single-sourced
supply
With 2 weeks of safety stock, resulting
production disruption of 4.5 months

-5%

Dual sources and stronger asset resilience:
only 3 months of 50% of supply disrupted
2x safety stock, spending at half pace due to dual
sourcing, lasting for 2 months
Only 1 month disruption of 50% supply

1. Includes structural plant failure, replacement, repairs, and/or requalification of equipment, as well as raw material, work-in-progress inventory, and
finished goods.
2. Lost revenues from disrupted sales, partly mitigated by reduced cost of goods sold proportional to reduction in sales volumes.
3. Includes costly additional labor, expensive backup power during grid failure, makeshift logistics solutions during rail or road disruptions, etc.
4. Excludes impact of insurance; exact outcomes vary considerably with local conditions and other factors.
Source: CP Analytics; Thailand government reports on 2011 floods; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

22

McKinsey Global Institute

The probability heavy rare earths production is severely disrupted from
extreme rainfall may increase two to three times by 2030
Heavy rare earths production is concentrated in southeastern China, which is increasingly
exposed to extreme rainfall. About 80 to 90 percent of global production is concentrated in
only 60 mines in a 150-kilometer-radius circle around Anyuan, in the province of Jiangxi. Heavy
rare earths are vital in permanent magnets and electronics used in the defense sector, electric
vehicles, wind turbines, consumer electronics, and medical appliances and typically cannot
be substituted with light rare earths or other materials without a significant drop in quality. We
examine this as an example of a commodity supply chain facing potential disruption.
Scientists are confident that continued increasing global temperatures will drive an increase
in intensity and frequency of heavy precipitation events in many regions. 33 We find that heavy
rare earth production in southeastern China will experience extreme precipitation events
(defined as events that occurred historically with an annual probability of about 2 percent,
corresponding to precipitation of about 170 millimeters per day in the relevant region) twice
as often by 2030. Expert estimates and historical events indicate that such rainfall events
significantly increase the risk of landslides in the region.
This region already has some of the strongest rainfalls in the world, with pluvial flooding nearly
every year, and some mines already close for a couple of months during the wet season in
mid-June to mid-September. Moreover, annual probability of extreme precipitation events has
already increased to 2.5 percent compared with the historical baseline of 1951-80, and will
continue evolving past 2030, reaching 6 percent annual probability by 2050. 34 While China
has invested significantly in flood defenses in the past 20 years this has primarily focused on
urban areas, and has done little to reduce risk to rare earth mines.
We estimate that the manifestation of an extreme precipitation event, or series of events,
could cause at least a 20 percent drop in heavy rare earth output, and potentially much more
in a worst case scenario. Damage mechanisms include excessive mud and landslides in
mines, flooding treatment ponds, and disrupted logistics to and from mines (Supply chain‑4).
Landslides are of particular concern, as they could both disrupt the ongoing leaching process
in the mine if leach holes collapse and prevent production after the landslide if on-site repair
works are required before new leach holes are dug (for example, to make sure that the soil
has stabilized). This means a large landslide could disrupt production for up to 12 months in
severely hit mines, though for most mines the disruption would be shorter if the landslide is
shallow and only affects parts of the mine.
Even a limited supply shortfall could cause prices to rise substantially (Supply chain‑5). During
the supply crisis in 2010–11, prices of several rare earths increased more than ten times. 35 The
supply crisis was caused by market fears and diplomatic tensions after China reduced export
quotas from about 50 metric tons to about 30 metric tons. 36 According to Chinese authorities,
environmental reasons and a crackdown on illegal mining caused the supply shortage. The
magnitude of the global shortfall in production is uncertain as reliable data on the extent of
the illegal mining prior to 2010 are scarce, but estimates range from 10 to 40 percent. 37

33
34

35
36
37

Richard Wartenburger et al., “Changes in regional climate extremes as a function of global mean temperature: An
interactive plotting framework,” Geoscientific Model Development, September 2017, Volume 10, Number 9.
It is important to note that near-term regional projections of precipitation extremes have been assessed as highly
sensitive to the influence of natural variability, particularly in lower latitudes, and therefore the 30-year projection is more
robust than the decadal projection. Furthermore, there is recent evidence from observational records indicating that
in many regions climate models may underestimate changes in precipitation volume. For more details on the relevant
uncertainties, please see: Ben Kirtman et al., “Near-term Climate Change: Projections and Predictability,” in Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Thomas F. Stocker et al., eds., New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press, 2014. Woods Hole Research Center.
Molycorp, 2014.
March Humphries, Rare Earth Elements: The Global Supply Chain, Specialist in Energy Policy December 16, 2013.
Wayne M. Morrison and Rachel Tang, China’s rare earth industry and export regime: Economic and trade implications
for the United States, US Congressional Research Service, April 30, 2012; Xibo Wang et al., “Production forecast of
China’s rare earths based on the Generalized Weng model and policy recommendations,” Resources Policy, March 2015,
Volume 43.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

23

Case study

Supply chain-4

The frequency of rainfall events in Southeast China with the potential
to cause landslides in mines producing heavy rare earth metals is
projected to continue to increase.
Future and annual probability of extreme precipitation
Defined as precipitation exceeding ~170mm per day

Based on RCP 8.5

Multiple,
compared
to historic1
0–2.0x

Today
Increase from historical
reference period (1951–81)
to current (1998–2017).

2.1–3.0x
3.1–4.0x
4.1–5.0x
>5.0x
Number
of mines
producing
heavy rare
earths2
1

2030
Increase relative to
historical reference period

2–3
4–9
>9

2050
Increase relative to
historical reference period

1. Multiple relative to historical reference period (1951–81).
2. Map shows 66 of 67 mines producing heavy rare earth metals globally, representing >90% of global production; some mines producing light rare
earths, e.g., Bayan Obo in Inner Mongolia, produce limited quantities of heavy rare earths.
Note: See the Technical Appendix for why we chose RCP 8.5. All projections based on RCP 8.5, CMIP 5 multimodel ensemble. Following standard
practice, we define current and future (2030 and 2050) states as average climatic behavior over multidecade periods. Climate state today is
defined as average conditions between 1998 and 2017, in 2030 as average between 2021 and 2040, and in 2050 between 2041 and 2060.
Source: Chinese Ministry of Information and Technology through NengApp.com; Woods Hole Research Center; McKinsey Global Institute analysis

24

McKinsey Global Institute

Case study

Supply chain-5

Supply shortfalls in rare earths could cause price spikes as happened in 2010–11.
STOXX Global Rare Earth Index prices for heavy rare earths
Index: 100 = January 2010

Dysprosium

2,200

Yttrium

Terbium

2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
Jan
2010
Chinese
government
announces
export quota
restriction on
rare earths

Jun
10

Sep
10

Jan
2011

Chinese government
announces rare earth
export ban to Japan
following diplomatic
tensions

Aug
11
35% reduction
in Chinese
export quotas
kicks in

Jan
2012

Aug
12

Jan
2013

Lynas opens
rare earth
mine in
Mount Wells,
Australia

Molycorp reopens
rare earth mine in
Mountain Pass,
California

Jan
2014

Source: Croat, 2018; Lynas Corp.; Molycorp, 2014; New York Times; Wiley Rein

Since the supply shortages, some rare earth consumers have attempted to build stockpiles
in case of price spikes, but public data on the scale of the stockpiling are scarce. For
downstream players without substantial inventories, a price spike would mean they either
have to reduce their consumption of heavy rare earths or increase their spending.
A supply shortfall would be more critical for some heavy rare earths than others. Since the
supply shortage in 2010–11, significant effort has been put into researching alternatives
to rare earths, but with limited success in the key application areas. Going forward, there
is concern about whether supply can keep up with demand for the materials that are used
in high-growth segments like cleantech and consumer electronics, as well as high-end
segments like aerospace and defense and medical appliances. Disruptions from climatic
disruptions will add extra pressure to a supply chain that has little to no slack. This particularly
applies to dysprosium (used in batteries, wind turbines, electric vehicles, and missile guidance
systems), erbium (used in fiber optics), and terbium and yttrium (used in display electronics
and low energy lighting). All of these materials are further used in high-end electronics (for
example, for radiation detection equipment and X-ray screens) as well as glass coloring.
Of these, dysprosium, terbium, and yttrium, together with the light rare earths neodymium
and europium, are considered “critical to advancement in a clean energy future” by the

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

25

US Department of Energy. 38 In the case of a supply shortfall, prices of these materials would
be particularly likely to spike, and customers with low inventories and low willingness to pay
would have to reduce their consumption through lower quality substitutes or reduced output.
Downstream players dependent on rare earths can protect themselves from climate-changeinduced physical risk by raising inventory levels at the cost of additional working capital and
storage space needed, similar to the semiconductor example above.
Rare earth miners can also adapt in other ways, for example, by using different leaching
products and processes that decrease the risk of landslides or moving leach holes away
from the steepest slopes. We estimate these measures could increase COGS by less than
5 percent.
Other adaptation measures could slightly decrease the output of the mines: one option
would be to select sites in areas with a lower concentration of mines in order to diversify risk,
even if these mines have marginally lower potential. For example, Yunnan and Hunan have less
than 2 mines today, while there are more than 54 mines in Jiangxi. Finally, if extreme rainfall is
expected, miners could extract the leach in the most mature leach holes ahead of schedule.
This would limit destruction of work in progress inventory when the rainfall turns mines to
mud. All adaptation measures mentioned could be implemented in the short term and would
eliminate about 50 to 80 percent of risk for rare earth miners, according to our estimates.

There is significant potential for industries to adapt and strengthen
supply chains in the face of growing climate risks
Supply chains and the infrastructure that supports them are designed for a stable climate.
As hazards evolve, it will be necessary to increase investment in adaptation, possibly at the
expense of efficiency.
Risk diagnostics should be a major consideration for many players. To successfully increase
climate resilience, supply chain managers should first identify which of their suppliers (and
their suppliers’ suppliers, and so on) are critical for business continuity, and what level of
climate hazard these suppliers face. Based on this information, an assessment can be made of
where the largest risks lie in the supply chain from climate-related hazards. This is a non-trivial
task: the many possible permutations and layers in supply chains, the interdependencies of
supply and demand and the vast optionality of different adaptation measures at different
points all create significant complexity. Investments in digital analytics to understand datadriven simulations of alternate adaptation and risk scenarios may be beneficial. No-regret
moves include: identifying and prioritizing key risks, having adequate insurance coverage,
setting up a war room and practicing simulations, and closer collaboration between suppliers
and buyers. While any individual action is insufficient to eliminate the supply disruption risk
entirely, a combination of adaptive actions can limit the risk significantly.
We find significant potential for many industries to adapt in the next decade, and indeed this
is already underway in some areas, including from public authorities, suppliers in high-hazard
locations, and customers in downstream sectors. For example, a leading global manufacturing
conglomerate has increased stocks of critical inputs and has entered contingency plan
agreements with suppliers to ensure they get allocation of available supplies following a
disaster. 39 A global agricultural business is diversifying its raw material sourcing across
different geographies and its industrial activities across crops, to reduce the impact of local
crop failures (for example, from unusual local weather conditions).

38
39

26

Nawshad Haque et al., “Rare earth elements: Overview of mining, mineralogy, uses, sustainability and environmental
impact,” Resources, October 2014, Volume 3, Number 4.
Weathering the storm: Building business resilience to climate change, Center for Climate and Energy Solutions,
July 2013.

McKinsey Global Institute

Broader adaptation measures we identify include:
— Protecting supply chain assets: For rare earth metals, this may include selecting
leaching chemicals that degrade the structural stability of the soil as little as possible;
putting lids on treatment ponds; limiting the slope around leach holes where possible;
and extracting leach from near-mature leach holes in advance of major rainfalls. For
semiconductors, this may include strengthening the inner shell around the clean rooms
where critical manufacturing equipment and WIP inventory are kept; elevating the facility
to stay above likely flood levels; or designing the facility so the most critical equipment
is on the higher floors. Approaches to protecting assets should be considered as early
as possible in the asset lifecycle, as tightening design standards will be cheaper than
hardening assets after they are constructed in most cases.
— Redesigning supply chain operations: Working to improve the extreme weather
preparedness of suppliers could help by encouraging suppliers to keep reserve capacity
of critical supplies on-site, increase flexibility of production so it can continue even
through a minor asset damage, or hold a war chest to be able to invest quickly to repair
damages after a natural disaster. Downstream players can increase the safety stock of
critical inputs to ensure their production continues even if the supply chain is interrupted.
In addition, it is helpful to keep an overview of all relevant inventory in the entire supply
chain, as there may be additional inventory at supplier sites or in transit.
— Reducing exposure by creating alternatives: By avoiding co-locating with a large share
of suppliers or helping specialized suppliers select plant locations with low climate hazard,
risk could be reduced. Finding ways to invest in spare production capacity to be able to
ramp up if one supplier is disrupted is another option. Where possible, companies could
source commoditized, generic parts and avoid at-risk materials or products. An option
includes increasing modularity in product design to make it possible to replace parts with
near substitutes without implications for other parts.
— Allocating risk by using financial and contractual mechanisms: Suppliers should
consider hedging commodity price extreme risks to limit the impact of price volatility,
engaging in long-term fixed-price contracts with resilient commodity suppliers to prevent
price flareups in a disaster, and investing in insurance to help recoup repair costs.
— Shoring up supply chain infrastructure: Supply chains are also heavily exposed
to infrastructure risk. Actions that can be taken to adapt include investment in
understanding granular local hazards and infrastructure vulnerabilities to help businesses
and communities adapt; organizing public-private partnerships to foster collaboration
on climate change adaptation for exposed infrastructure; investing in infrastructure
hardening to increase resistance to extreme weather; developing urban drainage
solutions to limit future flood levels; and investing in early warning systems to alert the
public when there is imminent risk of extreme weather events.
Not all actions will make sense for each supply chain category, as there often is a tradeoff between efficiency and resilience. For example, dual-sourcing may not make sense
if economies of scale are too large, as often is the case in pharmaceuticals or aerospace.
Building safety stock may be too costly if holding costs are high (for example, airplane
fuselage), inventory depreciation is high (for example, in semiconductors due to rapid
innovation lifecycles) or if there already is a supply backlog meaning building inventory would
limit current sales. There are “win-wins,” however—some actions that increase resiliency
can also increase efficiency or product quality. For instance, increasing modularity can
make it easier to innovate and improve product design, because the design of each part

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains

27

is less constrained by the other parts. For downstream players, this could also help provide broader
diversification opportunities across different suppliers and help reduce procurement costs. Similarly,
closer collaboration with suppliers of single-sourced inputs can both enable resilience and offer
opportunities for co-innovation through co-investing in asset hardening measures.
Industry 4.0 technologies could help support companies in achieving resilience as well as efficiency; for
example, through improving transparency in supply chains, and in some cases, potentially changing the
economics of production.

28

McKinsey Global Institute

McKinsey Global Institute
August 2020
Copyright © McKinsey & Company
Designed by the McKinsey Global Institute
www.mckinsey.com/mgi
@McKinsey
@McKinsey

