Supply Chain Resilience Guide April 2019 This page intentionally left blank Supply Chain Resilience Guide Strategic Overview Disasters disrupt preexisting networks of demand and supply. Quickly reestablishing flows of water, food, pharmaceuticals, medical goods, fuel, and other crucial commodities is almost always in the immediate interest of survivors and longer-term recovery.

When there has been catastrophic damage to critical infrastructure, such as the electrical grid and telecommunications systems, there will be an urgent need to resume—and possibly redirect— preexisting flows of life-preserving resources. In the case of densely populated places, when survivors number in the hundreds of thousands, only preexisting sources of supply have enough volume and potential flow to fulfill demand.

During the disasters in Japan (2011) and Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico (2017), sources of supply remained sufficient to fulfill survivor needs. But the loss of critical infrastructure, the surge in demand, and limited distribution capabilities (e.g., trucks, truckers, loading locations, and more) seriously complicated existing distribution capacity.

If emergency managers can develop an understanding of fundamental network behaviors, they can help avoid unintentionally suppressing supply chain resilience, with the ultimate goal of ensuring emergency managers “do no harm” to surviving capacity. Delayed and uneven delivery can prompt consumer uncertainty that increases demand and further challenges delivery capabilities.

On the worst days, involving large populations of survivors, emergency management can actively facilitate the maximum possible flow of preexisting sources of supply: public water systems; commercial water/beverage bottlers; food, pharmaceutical, and medical goods distributors; fuel providers; and others. To do this effectively requires a level of network understanding and a set of relationships that must be cultivated prior to the extreme event.

Ideally, key private and public stakeholders will conceive, test, and refine strategic concepts and operational preparedness through recurring workshops and tabletop exercises. When possible, mitigation measures will be pre-loaded. In this way, private-public and private-private relationships are reinforced through practical problem solving. Contemporary supply chains share important functional characteristics, but risk and resilience are generally anchored in local-to-regional conditions.

What best advances supply chain resilience in Miami will probably share strategic similarities with Seattle, but will be highly differentiated in terms of operations and who is involved. In recent years the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) have engaged with state, local, tribal and territorial partners, private sector, civic sector, and the academic community in a series of innovative interactions to enhance supply chain resilience.

This guide reflects the issues explored and the lessons (still being) learned from this process. The guide is designed to help emergency managers at every level think through the challenge and opportunity presented by supply chain resilience. Specific suggestions are made related to research, outreach, and action.

i Supply Chain Resilience Guide This page intentionally left blank ii Supply Chain Resilience Guide Table of Contents INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................................... 1 Purpose .............................................................................................................................................. 1 Background ....................................................................................................................................... 1 Supply Chain Defined .............................................................................................................. 2 Supply Chain Resilience .......................................................................................................... 3 Supply Chains and Emergency Management .......................................................................... 4 Community Lifelines ............................................................................................................... 5 SUPPLY CHAIN RESILIENCE PROCESS.............................................................................. 8 Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 8 Phase 1: Research and Mapping ..................................................................................................... 9 Phase 2: Analysis ............................................................................................................................ 11 Phase 3: Outreach........................................................................................................................... 13 Phase 4: Action ............................................................................................................................... 15 Phase 5: Assess and Refine ............................................................................................................ 16 CONNECTION TO LOGISTICS PLANNING ....................................................................... 19 Overview .......................................................................................................................................... 19 Considerations ................................................................................................................................ 19 Supply Source ........................................................................................................................ 20 Distribution Points ................................................................................................................. 20 Inventory ................................................................................................................................ 21 Access and Re-entry............................................................................................................... 21 Routes .................................................................................................................................... 23 Fuel ........................................................................................................................................ 24 Transportation Operators ....................................................................................................... 24 APPENDIX A.

DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT .............................................................. 25 Requesting DPA Priority Ratings ................................................................................................. 25 Establishing a Voluntary Agreement ............................................................................................ 26 APPENDIX B.

COMMUNITY LIFELINE FRAMEWORK ........................................... 27 Safety and Security ......................................................................................................................... 27 Food, Water, Sheltering ................................................................................................................. 28 Health and Medical ........................................................................................................................ 29 Energy (Power & Fuel) .................................................................................................................. 30 Communications ............................................................................................................................. 31 Transportation ................................................................................................................................ 32 Hazardous Material........................................................................................................................ 32 APPENDIX C. SUPPLY CHAIN RESILIENCE ENGAGEMENT CHECKLIST ........ 34 APPENDIX D. COMPLEX SUPPLY CHAIN EXAMPLE .............................................. 36 iii Supply Chain Resilience Guide This page intentionally left blank iv Supply Chain Resilience Guide Introduction Supply Chain Resilience The most effective way to deliver the needed supplies to a disaster-impacted area is by re-establishing pre-disaster supply chains.

Building resilience within, and providing for the rapid restoration of, supply chain systems is key to responding to any catastrophic incident. 1 Purpose This document provides emergency managers with recommendations on how to analyze supply chains and to work with the private sector to enhance supply chain resilience in support of Comprehensive Preparedness Guide (CPG) 101: Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans.

2 This document also identifies how the results of the supply chain resilience process can inform logistics planning. Background Each day, individuals and families routinely receive critical goods and services such as water, food, pharmaceuticals, medical goods, power, and fuel from healthy, functioning supply chains.

However, in times of disaster, even supply chains that were previously functioning well can experience significant disruption, generating acute life-safety challenges and quickly turning a disaster into a catastrophe. Supply chains that effectively adapt to disasters, disruptions, and fluctuating needs greatly benefit the community and can reduce the need for a larger response and recovery operation.

While the private sector operates and maintains the Resilient supply chains are a critical majority of supply chains, emergency managers can element in protecting community lifelines. play a critical role in enhancing supply chain Community lifelines provide resilience by fostering awareness and collaboration indispensable services that (1) enable the among key supply chain players and promoting continuous operation of critical business actions to enhance supply chain resilience.

They and government functions, and (2) are critical to human health and safety or must also be aware of supply chain vulnerabilities economic security. and potential impacts to the community so that they can develop effective emergency response plans and Survivors depend on community lifelines, which depend on resilient supply chains, operate efficiently in times of disaster.

For example, to save and sustain life, ensure public emergency response plans are often based on the safety, and speed economic recovery. assumption of working supply chains. Awareness of vulnerabilities can help emergency managers understand the potential impacts of disrupted supply chains.

In addition, such awareness helps managers to support the private sector in re-establishing supply chains and to take necessary actions to mitigate the impacts (e.g., prioritizing stabilization of critical supply chain 1 FEMA Strategic Plan 2018–2022, https://www.fema.gov/strategic-plan. FEMA, CPG 101: Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans, Version 2.0, (Washington, DC, 2010), https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/25975.

2 1 Supply Chain Resilience Guide infrastructure, reviewing stockpile options, and identifying alternate supply chains for emergencies when needed). Integrating the needs of supply chains into mitigation, response, recovery, and resilience planning and actions is key to improving supply chain resilience and ensuring the availability of key goods and services.

To effectively support supply chain resilience and develop response and recovery plans, emergency managers must understand the activities and principles for each local supply chain, similar to the general understanding they have with law enforcement, fire suppression, emergency medical services, and public works.

Awareness of supply and demand flows, bottlenecks, interconnections, and interdependencies between supply chains is as important to disaster planning and resilience building as knowledge of the local road networks and floodplains. The State of Alaska 2012 Evaluation of Supply Chains and Resilience Building Issue: The supply chains to Alaska primarily come from the mainland United States, either by ship from Seattle, Washington, to Anchorage, Alaska, or by air.

As previous disasters have demonstrated, severe winter weather, volcanoes, and earthquakes could cut off Alaska’s normal supply chains for several weeks or months. In 1964, Alaska experienced a 9.2-magnitude earthquake and subsequent tsunami that devastated its power infrastructure, shipping, and distribution networks. Action: In 2012, the State of Alaska assessed the supply chains that provide food, supplies, and fuel to the state.

Result: Based on the assessment, the State of Alaska explored procuring shelf-stable meals for 40,000 survivors for seven days. In addition, the State identified the need to store medical supplies, cold-climate water purification systems, and generators. A significant consideration included food that was culturally and nutritionally appropriate for both the urban city residents and for rural Alaskan diets, such as smoked salmon.

Recent catastrophic logistics planning shows that Alaska has seven days of food available following a disruption to the supply chain. Supply Chain Defined A supply chain has many definitions. This guide defines a supply chain as the socio-technical network that identifies, targets, and fulfills demand. It is the process of deciding what, when, and how much should move to where. Supply chains can be vastly complex, and they can vary significantly from product to product.

Appendix D presents a complex example of a supply chain, specific to petroleum. However, all supply chains include the same basic components. As Figure 1 shows, supply chains include the following: • Supply Nodes – Entities that manufacture, process, store, and/or ship goods and services. They generally include raw material providers, suppliers, manufacturers, and distributors.

(Also Known As: Origins, Outputs, Vertices, Terminals, Warehouses, Distribution Centers, Cross Docks, Push Places, and more.) • Demand Nodes – Entities that purchase and/or signal for goods and services from supply nodes. They generally include individuals, families, businesses, and governments. (Also Known As: Destinations, Inputs, Vertices, Retailers, Pull Places, and more.) • Tiers – A common way to group nodes and identify upstream and downstream relationships within the supply chain.

Tier 1 suppliers provide products or services to the 2 Supply Chain Resilience Guide producer/processor; Tier 2 suppliers provide products or services to Tier 1 suppliers; Tier 3 suppliers provide products or services to Tier 2 suppliers. As the Tier numbers get higher, the further that supplier is from the producer/processor of the finished product. • Links – The physical and functional connections between nodes, such as communication, transport, or transaction connections.

Links can also relate to service infrastructure, such as power. (Also Known As: Edges, Arcs, Paths, Tracks, Routes, and more.) Supply chains involve the movement of products, information, and money. Products flow from supply nodes to demand nodes, while money usually follows the reverse direction. Information sharing occurs among all nodes. Humans are agents within the nodes and links.

Figure 1: Supply Chain Diagram Supply Chain Resilience Supply chains are fundamental to modern life and often fluctuate to address minor disruptions and changes in both supply and demand. However, the common supplemental and gap-filling functions that address minor changes may be insufficient to mitigate significant supply chain disruptions.

Disruptions that significantly impede or stop the capability or capacity for a good or service can have a significant impact on communities, particularly in times of disaster. Supply chain resilience is the ability of a preexisting network of demand and supply to deploy surviving capacity, and/or introduce new capacity, under severe duress.

It is the ability of a network, or portion of a network, to continue moving (directing, redirecting, flowing) goods and services even when important elements of the network are no longer operating. For example, the 3 Supply Chain Resilience Guide continued flow of water, food, and fuel while the electric power grid is not operating would be an expression of supply chain resilience.

A meaningful awareness and understanding of preexisting networks, including major players, crucial places, interdependencies, vulnerabilities, and threats, enhances the ability of emergency managers to interact with supply chain owners and operators to support and improve supply chain resilience and post-incident restoration.

As is often the case for emergency managers, it is not necessary to have expert knowledge, but there is value in having sufficient awareness and understanding to communicate effectively with experts (and in this case, especially with the owners and operators of the preexisting networks). All supply chain components, such as the transportation mechanisms between nodes, facilities, people, and communication networks, can impact supply chain resilience.

Other examples of attributes that may impact supply chain resilience include: • Just-in-time inventory practices • Core reliance on information technology systems and data exchange • A diverse risk landscape • Industry consolidation into a small set of large suppliers • The regulatory environment and constraints on supply chain flexibility.

Supply Chains and Emergency Management Emergency managers have two primary roles related to supply chain resilience: • To foster collaboration with and among supply chain partners to promote actions that make supply chains of critical goods and services more resilient. • To develop an awareness of supply chains and their vulnerabilities and use that information to inform response and recovery planning.

Emergency managers frequently foster collaboration to create and promote resilience efforts across private and public sectors. However, few supply chain players have experience coordinating with emergency managers, and it can be challenging for emergency managers to engage these organizations with disaster planning and resilience-building actions.

For example, some regulated public sector and private sector supply chains may require legal actions to build or improve resilience, with an increase in costs transferred to the residents and businesses in the jurisdiction. Other supply chains involve private sector businesses that compete with each other, which can hinder collaboration and hide interdependencies.

As such, emergency managers may need to employ non-traditional approaches to engage some supply chain stakeholders to fully understand the vulnerabilities of the supply chain. For example, one non-traditional approach is to implement seldom-used authorities, such as the Defense Production Act (DPA), to bridge gaps. The DPA has authorities, which Appendix A discusses in detail, that facilitate collaboration by removing barriers between the public and private sectors.

The Supply Chain Resilience Process section of this guide includes tips and best practices for engaging supply chain partners in resilience efforts. 4 Supply Chain Resilience Guide The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) oversees the National Business Emergency Operations Center (NBEOC) to facilitate private sector engagement at the national level.

Jurisdictions are encouraged to establish a NBEOC agreement to streamline communications and coordination with private sector members and establish data-sharing agreements. 3 One potential way to bolster relationships with supply chain stakeholders is to establish a Business Emergency Operations Center (BEOC) within the jurisdiction’s Emergency Operation Center (EOC) and to connect the BEOC to existing private sector EOCs.

To effectively plan for response and recovery operations and support supply chain resilience, emergency managers need an awareness and understanding of the systems that make up a supply chain and the distribution networks that support the jurisdiction.

4 Emergency managers should also understand the legal constraints that can impact supply chain resilience, such as road and driver restrictions, normal licensing for delivery of medical and food items, restrictions on the movements or storage of medical gases, on-site fuel storage rules, conflicting rules across adjacent jurisdictions, data privacy and availability, and specific legal restraints regarding procurement practices.

This knowledge will help emergency managers develop realistic plans and prioritize actions that support supply chain resilience. For example, debris removal is a vital aspect of restoring supply chain functionality. Emergency managers can facilitate public-private sector debris removal plans focused on partnerships with private sector supply chains. Community Lifelines 5 Government alone cannot respond to the threats and hazards that affect our communities and citizens.

Response is a shared responsibility across multiple stakeholder groups, including governments, the private sector, and non-government entities. Often these groups do not share the same lexicon to facilitate unity of purpose across all stakeholders.

The community lifelines construct promotes a response that facilitates unity of purpose and better communication among the whole community (Federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial governments, and private sector and non-governmental entities) to prioritize, sequence, and focus response efforts towards maintaining or restoring the most critical services and infrastructure.

A community lifeline enables the continuous operation of government functions and critical business and is essential to human health and safety or economic security. The seven community lifelines are described below. 6 3 More information on the NBEOC, including the NBEOC’s purpose, operation engagement tools, membership, and commonly asked questions, can be found on the NBEOC fact sheet at https://www.fema.gov/medialibrary/assets/documents/28983 or by emailing FEMA-Private-Sector@fema.dhs.gov.

4 FEMA National Mitigation Framework, Second Edition, June 2016. 5 Community Lifelines Toolkit. https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/177222 6 The community lifelines concept is still evolving. Please visit www.fema.gov for more information. 5 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Safety and Security – Supports responder and survivor safety and the continuity of government (including basic services, firefighting, and law enforcement).

This lifeline provides critical actions that enable the other lifelines to function. Food, Water, Sheltering – Supports current and projected community needs for food, water, durable goods, and shelter capacity, as well as evacuations and water and agricultural infrastructure.

Health and Medical – Provides medical care, public health support, pre-hospital care, fatality management services, behavioral health services, and support to the medical industry to ensure life-saving and sustaining services are adequate to meet the needs of the impacted area. Energy (Power & Fuel) – Provides electric power, gas, and liquid fuel to support the needs of the whole community.

It includes electric power generation, transmission, and distribution systems, as well as gas and liquid fuel processing, transportation, and delivery systems. This lifeline supports the whole community’s response efforts by enabling all other community lifelines. Communications – Supports the transmission of information through mechanisms such as broadband internet, ethernet, cellular networks, cable television, and radio broadcast networks.

It covers all types of communications necessary to effectively respond to and help survivors, including alerts and warnings, 911 and dispatch, and responder communications. This lifeline supports the whole community’s response efforts by enabling all other community lifelines. Transportation – Enables the movement of goods and services to support the whole community.

Transportation infrastructure generally includes highway/roadways, mass transit, rail, aviation, shipping, pipeline, and intermodal systems. This lifeline supports the whole community’s response efforts by enabling all other community lifelines. Hazardous Material – Covers the management (including containment and removal) of all hazardous materials.

It focuses on ensuring that hazardous substance facilities, conveyance assets, wastewater systems, and incident debris, pollutants, and contaminants do not require ongoing emergency responses to mitigate imminent or substantial threats to public health and welfare or the environment. The lifeline construct provides numerous benefits to jurisdictions, such as helping prioritize, sequence, and focus response efforts towards maintaining or restoring the most critical services and infrastructure.

In the context of supply chain resilience, lifelines provide jurisdictions with a way to understand and examine complex (multifaceted) supply chains that require cross-sector coordination. Community lifelines also identify critical focus areas for jurisdictions to consider, as secondary supply chain problems can result from broken lifelines. For example, a break in the power grid can lead to a surge in generator and fuel demand.

This in turn impacts local gas prices from surge demand and/or a shortage in generator supply. 6 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Case Study: Resupplying Miami In the aftermath of Hurricane Irma in 2017, resupply of the Miami metropolitan area was complicated by widespread electrical outages and fuel shortages resulting from mass evacuation.

In some cases, resupply of groceries and other key resources into Miami required the resupply of fuel and the restoration of electricity or emergency backup to truck stops along Interstate 95. Lifelines are often interdependent and widely geographically distributed. When disruption or destruction cascades across multiple critical infrastructures and supply chains simultaneously, timely restoration and possible redirection often benefits from private-public collaboration.

In the case of Hurricane Irma, the private and public sectors worked together to expedite restoration of the Energy and Transportation lifelines, including identifying grid connections for truck stops, providing emergency backup generation for truck stops, and delivering fuel to the truck stops. This collaboration also benefitted other lifelines, such as Food, Water, Sheltering.

7 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Supply Chain Resilience Process Overview To enhance supply chain resilience, emergency managers should develop a strategic understanding of the current supply chains and engage with relevant stakeholders, such as vendors and industry associations, to foster public-private sector collaboration, cooperation, and planning. This section presents a five-phased cyclical approach to enhance supply chain resilience (see Figure 2).

Figure 2: Supply Chain Resilience Phases Before beginning the five-phase process, emergency managers should identify an initial supply chain to explore. As supply chain networks are complex systems with numerous stakeholders, nodes, and specialized concerns, emergency managers who are just starting to engage supply chain issues may find it helpful to focus on the supply chain for a single good or service, such as groceries or fuel.

Developing experience and confidence in one supply chain will often accelerate engagement with multiple supply chains and the interdependencies that supply chains share. As emergency managers become more comfortable with the process, they will find it easier to expand the focus to a community lifeline, which may encompass multiple goods or services (see Appendix B for more information).

The first two phases of the supply chain resilience process, Phase 1: Research and Mapping and Phase 2: Analysis, use open source data to identify and analyze a supply chain. The goal is to develop a strategic understanding of the supply chain, helping emergency managers identify key stakeholders with which to engage and potentially uncovering supply chain resilience issues.

Phase 3: Outreach engages specific stakeholders to vet the findings from the first two phases and develop collaborative relationships focused on enhancing supply chain resilience. 8 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Phase 4: Action develops and implements preparedness activities, including tabletop exercises, with partners to enhance supply chain resilience.

These preparedness activities may include actions that private sector partners can take, either to mitigate disruption of their nodes or links or to create continuity in the event of a disruption. They may also include developing or revising Emergency Operations Plan annexes or logistics plans outlining how the jurisdiction will implement logistics operations in light of potential supply chain issues.

Phase 5: Assess and Refine maintains the effort by refreshing the data and revising the analysis as needed and continuing to collaborate with stakeholders. Supply chains and stakeholders are constantly changing, so an ongoing effort is critical. The following sections present additional details about each phase of the supply chain resilience process, along with examples of how this process may apply to the fuel sector. Figure 3 on page 17 provides a consolidated graphic of the fuel sector examples.

Phase 1: Research and Mapping This phase uses readily available data, such as open source information or other available data sets, to identify and map supply chain nodes. 7 This information, which the emergency manager will analyze in Phase 2, provides important insight into the supply chain’s key players.

However, given the constantly evolving nature of supply chains, the goal is to develop a strategic understanding of the local/regional demand and supply network to identify key supply chain players with whom to engage. A detailed and comprehensive understanding of the global supply chain is not necessary. To complete this phase, emergency managers should: Many resources are available to support emergency managers with Research and Mapping (Phase 1) and Analysis (Phase 2).

Examples include:  DHS Infrastructure Protection (IP) partners in the FEMA Regions  Private sector contractors  The Regional Resiliency Assessment Program (RRAP) (https://www.dhs.gov/regionalresiliency-assessment-program)  FEMA’s Planning Technical Assistance Program (https://www.fema.gov/fematechnical-assistance-program). • Identify the primary crucial suppliers for the local community.

Emergency managers may use a variety of sources for this step, such as online searches, local community knowledge, and local economic reports. Strategic plans, Emergency Operations Plans, or other plans and policy documents are also good sources, as they may identify response operational priorities or previously identified supply nodes. • Identify supply chain nodes within the scope of the review.

Supply chains are global, so defining a geographic boundary when reviewing Last mile is the movement of products each supply chain helps scope the analysis into a along the final stretch of the supply manageable size. Boundaries to consider include chain to deliver products to their final the state, a region, and/or focusing mainly on “last destination, often covering the mile” delivery.

It is not practical or necessary to movement of the product from the identify all nodes within a supply chain; focus on distributor to the demand node. identifying nodes that serve a large proportion of 7 The NBEOC can assist with establishing data-sharing agreements to support this effort. 9 Supply Chain Resilience Guide demand and/or supply. Concentration occurs in both demand and supply nodes and is especially typical of supply nodes.

These points of concentration, such as ports, distribution centers, and fuel terminals/racks, are fundamental to the strategic capacity of the entire supply chain. As long as the point of concentration persists, the capacity to supply the demand is likely to persist. The capacity to supply the demand significantly drops if the point of concentration is destroyed or separated from its network.

It is common for 80 percent of key goods and services serving a densely populated area to depend on seven or fewer distribution centers. 8 • Identify ultimate destinations of goods. By widening the scope of distribution nodes, emergency managers can obtain a more complete picture of a supply chain. For example, part of supply chain resilience for healthcare goods is knowing the location of healthcare product distribution centers.

An expanded understanding of the multitude of end customer sites (such as hospitals, clinics, pharmacies, surgical centers, dialysis centers, and cancer treatment centers) provides information to inform more robust resilience efforts. • Identify infrastructure systems supporting supply chain operations. To more fully address supply chain resilience, emergency managers should identify the infrastructure dependencies of key nodes, along with their physical locations.

Utility service providers, their geographic service areas, critical utility system nodes, and transportation routes/mechanisms are especially important to rapidly restore normal supply chain operations. Some supply chain infrastructure dependencies are themselves supply chains (e.g., diesel and gasoline fuels) that emergency managers may also need to explore.

Electric power, refined fuels, natural gas, water, wastewater, and communications are the infrastructure systems most likely to be dependencies of the various nodes comprising a supply chain, though others will certainly exist. • Overlay key threats and hazards, and other stressors and disruptors, against the identified primary crucial suppliers. Hazard Mitigation Plans may provide key threats, hazards, and mitigation strategies for this stage of research.

Geographic Information System (GIS) specialists may provide mapping support by overlaying identified hazards across supply chain nodes and known routes. 8 The concentrated nature of the wholesale level of the U.S. (and other advanced economies) tends to be referenced sector by sector. In many sectors and for many products, the concentration level is consistently high, but individual players may change from city to city or region to region.

Sector-specific articles that support this include The Pareto rule for frequently purchased packaged goods: an empirical generalization, 2018 Top Pharmaceutical Distributors, and Concentration and Mergers in U.S. Wholesale Grocery Markets.

10 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Phase 2: Analysis After identifying and mapping the demand and supply nodes, emergency managers conduct an initial analysis of the supply chain by examining the importance of specific suppliers and nodes previously identified and targeting outreach to these potential stakeholders. In this phase, emergency managers: • Assess the capabilities of the infrastructures and organizations previously identified through engagement.

Self-assessments may be beneficial in this effort, as stakeholders can self-disclose their capabilities, plans, and partnerships for further planning coordination. Most contemporary demand and supply networks are diverse, dynamic, and very difficult to fully comprehend, but the intent is to think through key questions and identify and document the information available.

Distinguish between the nodes that comprise a supply chain (such as manufacturing facilities and hospitals) and the infrastructure that those nodes depend on (such as electric power, water systems, and transportation). The distinction is important, as the two groups of systems/nodes need analysis from different perspectives. For example, a power company that serves key supply chain nodes may be able to offer anticipated recovery time objectives for service to that area following a disruption.

This is a helpful detail for comparison against the supply chain node’s on-site backup power capabilities and the length of time that it can operate without refueling. If power restoration recovery time objectives are longer than the length of time that the supply chain node can operate on backup without significant impact to operations, then there is a resilience gap. Examples of key questions to include in the analysis process: ‒ ‒ Can you determine sources of strategic capacity?

 Can you identify the potential downstream flow of water, food, pharmaceuticals, medical goods, fuel, and other key goods and services?  What is the volume and velocity of these flows on most days? What is the regular throughput?  How quickly can volume increase and be distributed? Based on your research and mapping phase, where is the strategic capacity of preexisting supply chains located?  Who owns this strategic capacity?

11 Supply Chain Resilience Guide  ‒ ‒ What, if any, elements of this strategic capacity are likely to survive your jurisdiction’s catastrophic risks? Who are the key players? In many cases, capacity has significant concentrations; identify the seven or fewer sources that are likely to generate 70 to 80 percent of total flows.  Is current strategic capacity already insufficient in some geographic areas (for example, areas with a lack of grocery stores and food providers)?

 Are risks especially likely to create particularly troublesome new deficiencies in any geographic areas? Are your sources of strategic capacity dependent on or interdependent with critical infrastructure or other key resources?  If these dependencies fail, are mitigation strategies and measures in place?  What is your professional judgment regarding the survival of sufficient strategic capacity for key resources?

Appendix B provides additional considerations specific to supply chains for all seven community lifelines—Safety and Security; Food, Water, Sheltering; Health and Medical; Energy (Power & Fuel); Communications; Transportation; and Hazardous Material. • Identify key stakeholders to target for engagement. Based on the answers to the previous analytical questions, identify where to focus outreach efforts for Phase 3.

Consider the following questions when identifying stakeholders to target: ‒ What are the highest priority needs?  What are the dependencies or interdependencies that have the broadest impact?  Given your risks and your population needs, which element(s) of the supply chain would enhance resilience to serve the highest number of, or perhaps most vulnerable, survivors? ‒ What external entities are most important to enhancing supply chain resilience? ‒ What functions or roles are most important?

‒ Among these priorities, where or with whom do you already have trusted relationships?  12 Is the trusted relationship with a supply chain professional? If not, can the trusted party provide an appropriate introduction?

Supply Chain Resilience Guide Phase 3: Outreach After analyzing the supply chain, emergency managers can engage with key stakeholders, including private sector organizations, relevant jurisdictions, and other community partners, to vet their findings and begin the collaboration process. Whenever possible, outreach should involve supply chain professionals, including distribution center managers, procurement managers, and transportation managers.

However, in some organizations, supply chain professionals may be difficult to engage and are often introduced through contacts with safety, security, and external relations professionals. Successful outreach often depends on finding at least one internal champion. The champion is not always a supply chain professional but is someone who can ensure the direct participation of supply chain professionals.

In some contexts, supply chain resilience problems and opportunities require involvement of senior executives. In this case, it may be necessary for senior emergency management or political leadership to reach out. However, this should be done in close communication with the supply chain and other professionals already engaged. In this phase, emergency managers: • Hold targeted meetings to vet findings and initial analysis.

Reach out to the identified stakeholders to initiate discussions about current priorities, concerns, and knowledge of supply chain resilience. The organizations involved with supply chains are predominantly private sector entities. These partners may already have emergency management considerations in company plans, trainings, and experience.

Consider these best practices when initiating and holding discussions with supply chain stakeholders: ‒ When opening a new relationship, it may be helpful to visit the other party's place of business for a one-on-one informal discussion. This approach can help build rapport and trust, which is critical to the success of the effort. ‒ Consider asking for a tour of their facilities.

This is often a good starting point, as the organization may enjoy showing off their facility, and it provides you with the opportunity to ask naturally occurring questions about how they operate, which will often serve to confirm or deny aspects of your Phase 2 analysis. ‒ A discussion, and cultivating trust, is more likely to emerge from asking questions than from making 13 Supply Chain Resilience Guide statements.

The same sort of questions asked in the prior analysis phase can be a good place to begin. • 14 ‒ Consider asking how you can support the private sector in building more resilient supply chains. ‒ Explain your concept for catastrophe preparedness and outline the desired end state. Emphasize the importance of their organization to the effort. ‒ Some private sector entities are not familiar with catastrophic risk profiles.

After a brief presentation, ask the individual(s) how and where the risk profile has the most potential impact on their supply chains. ‒ Meaningfully vet the outcomes of your analysis, and assess the collaborative readiness of a supply chain owner/operator. in two or three one-on-one (or small group) meetings. In many cases, finding one or two market leaders ready to collaborate will help encourage others to participate.

Typically, at the point you perceive that at least three entities constituting at least fifty percent of your jurisdiction’s strategic capacity are ready to collaborate, a more group-oriented process may be productive. A checklist for the group process is in Appendix C. ‒ Consider meeting with both the private sector organization’s operational leaders and the public relations staff to clarify roles/responsibilities as they relate to either operational requirements and/or messaging.

Identify and prioritize issues to address, in coordination with the key stakeholders. This process may take various forms depending on the preferences of the participants. One common approach is to use tabletop exercises to identify critical issues. As the exercises identify issues, emergency managers and stakeholders can work together to prioritize them.

The criteria for prioritization will vary from group to group, but consider the criticality of the issue and the feasibility of developing an economical approach to mitigating or resolving the issue. Supply Chain Resilience Guide Phase 4: Action After engaging with key stakeholders and identifying/prioritizing issues to address, emergency managers can collaborate with relevant stakeholders to develop and implement preparedness activities and enhance supply chain resilience.

Supply chain resilience is a still-developing discipline of emergency management. Depending on purposes, private-public relationships, and priorities emerging from the research and outreach phases, different jurisdictions will deploy different actions. In many of the most mature examples of action taken to enhance supply chain resilience, tabletop exercises (TTXs) have been especially helpful.

Private sector entities seem to value the ability of emergency management professionals to convene various stakeholders, frame supply chain risks, design and execute realistic TTXs, facilitate action-oriented discussion, and deliver After Action Reports that drive future collaboration and follow-on exercises.

In some cases, a recurring calendar of private-public workshops and TTXs is hosted by a civic sector organization (professional or academic entity) that serves as a helpful broker between private and public, a source of operational continuity, and a safe place for very different stakeholders to interact. 15 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Phase 5: Assess and Refine After reviewing a supply chain, creating partnerships, and developing a resilience plan, maintenance begins.

Supply chains evolve so rapidly that resilience requires continuous collaboration with stakeholders and reviewing and refining data, analysis, and plans. In this phase, emergency managers: • Maintain relationships. It is essential to maintain the relationships built through this process. Some ways include holding annual reviews and recurring discussions with stakeholders and engaging stakeholders in relevant exercises throughout the year. • Validate and refine data.

The constantly evolving nature of supply chains means the data collected throughout this process can change quickly. While it is not necessary to constantly monitor and update every detail, it is important to frequently review and refine the data. This may include independent research by emergency managers, as well as regular conversations with key stakeholders to identify changes. Training and exercises can also support this step.

Incorporate identified changes to refine plans or develop new plans to enhance supply chain resilience. • Target outreach as needed. While maintaining the relationships developed through this process is crucial, it is also important to identify other important stakeholders and target outreach to them, as needed. For example, as supply chains evolve, emergency managers may identify new crucial suppliers, whom they should then engage in the supply chain resilience process.

16 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Figure 3: Supply Chain Resilience Process – Fuel Sector Example 17 Supply Chain Resilience Guide This page intentionally left blank 18 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Connection to Logistics Planning Overview The supply chain resilience process described in the previous section focuses on understanding supply chain vulnerabilities and identifying actions to enhance resilience. However, in extreme events, supply chains will not always be resilient.

For example, disasters can destroy nodes, separate demand from sources of supply, destroy road networks, or create long-term disruption. While many impediments are possible, some are predictable. The results of the five-phased supply chain resilience process provide emergency managers with valuable information to inform actions to restore supply chains and priorities for logistics planning.

It yields an understanding of key supply chain stakeholders, vulnerabilities, and challenges and identifies actions emergency managers may need to take in the event of supply chain disruption. Emergency managers should use this information to develop or refine logistics plans or annexes, following the six-step planning process described in CPG 101 (see Figure 4).

9 Figure 4: Six-Step Planning Process from CPG 101 For example, identifying key supply chain stakeholders through the supply chain resilience process provides emergency managers with critical potential members for the Collaborative Planning Team (Step 1). Additionally, emergency managers can apply the outcomes from the supply chain resilience process to understand the situation (Step 2), as well as to establish or refine operational priorities and develop goals and objectives (Step 3).

Considerations This section presents additional considerations that emergency managers may want to explore to develop a unified approach to restoring community lifelines: restoring private sector supply chains and public sector logistics planning. Emergency managers may have uncovered some of these answers during the supply chain resilience process or may need to conduct additional analysis efforts to identify necessary details.

To effectively inform logistics planning, emergency managers should examine known and potential hazards plotted along the supply chain, alternate routes, alternate methods of transportation, and any known restrictions of storage, handling, and/or transportation. Their analysis should address both the supply chain nodes (e.g., manufacturing sites, storage facilities, distribution facilities, customers’ receiving sites), as well as the infrastructure on which these nodes depend.

For example, it is important to include the power infrastructure that provides service to a key tunnel along a main supply route, as without power the tunnel may need to be closed due to inoperable ventilation systems. 9 FEMA, CPG 101: Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans, Version 2.0, (Washington, DC, 2010), https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/25975.

19 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Supply Source Supply nodes may be overseas, across the country, or in a hazardous area. Consider what potential events may impact supplier production (e.g., extreme weather or natural disasters, political upheaval, national holidays). Steps include: • Identify the origin of supplies, tracing the supply chain as far upstream as practical. • Review relevant foreign customs and holidays.

‒ • Some countries shut down factory work for several days, even weeks, each year to celebrate holidays. Consider alternative supply sources. ‒ To what extent do customers have secondary contracts? How easily could customers turn to new sources in a major event? ‒ What plans and capabilities do suppliers have as part of their business continuity plans? Are they likely to fill a gap with limited or no direct involvement by government?

Distribution Points Emergency managers should review the distribution points for the supply chain within the network under review. Multiple distribution points may help reroute supplies to other distribution centers to alleviate some local distribution strain during disasters. Reviewing multiple modes of distribution may help planning teams identify stakeholders to include in planning efforts.

Steps include: • Review distribution points: ‒ Determine the need to prioritize route clearances, restore power, water, and communication, and provide staff access. ‒ Coordinate with other jurisdictions to inform them of the importance of distribution points if they are located outside of your jurisdiction.

‒ Identify legal/regulatory restrictions that could impede an easy transfer to another distribution location (e.g., required licensing to service a given destination, such as with certain pharmaceuticals). ‒ Identify specialized capabilities or needs of certain distribution points (e.g., cold chain/refrigeration, reliance on automation and information technology).

‒ Identify the second- and third-tier backup sites for the primary points of distribution, and determine potential delays, cost increases, or transport options. ‒ Identify alternative facilities that can be used to reroute supplies. ‒ Consider multiple modes of distribution. • Consider door-to-door delivery service, such as how the Postal Service delivers medication. • Include supply chain distribution points in logistics planning to provide community lifeline support.

20 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Inventory Supply chains provide community lifeline goods and services to the jurisdiction pre-disaster. Post-disaster, the jurisdiction may need to augment a community lifeline that supply chains temporarily cannot provide. During logistics planning, emergency managers should review standard inventory supply, resupply intervals, storage facilities or compartments and their power requirements, and Just-In-Time restock options during emergency scenarios.

Just-In-Time resupply adaptability may mitigate short-term breaks in the supply chain. Additional steps include: • Consider the process to invoke government-managed emergency stockpiles for food, water, and healthcare. ‒ • • • Will this help or harm recovery of supply chains? Determine if the capability and capacity of supply chains’ inventory status is available to emergency managers. ‒ Are companies likely to provide detailed data, and could anti-competitive/legal concerns arise?

‒ Consider how purely commercial interests may adversely harm restoration of the normal supply chain (e.g., hoarding supplies out of concern for shortages, exacerbating the shortages). Review standard inventory supply. ‒ Review resupply intervals. ‒ Review Just-In-Time restock opportunities. ‒ Consider seasonal influxes. ‒ Consider temperature-sensitive stock. Review secondary power source options. ‒ Backup generators. ‒ Fuel for the generators.

‒ Consider additional equipment, such as cables, hookups adaptors, and batteries. Access and Re-entry 10 Supply chain logistics, partnerships, and memoranda of understanding (MOUs) should consider route security and escort needs. Local police departments and military units may be sources of security during emergency events. Restricted area access and security at the point of distribution may require additional communication.

To prevent denial of entry, personnel stationed at the checkpoints along the route, at barriers, and/or at the facility need to be aware of what is in the 10 The Crisis Event Response and Recovery Access (CERRA) Framework, developed by the DHS Office of Infrastructure Protection, outlines a common approach to manage access to affected areas during and after an incident.

For more information, visit https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Crisis%20Event%20Response%20and%20Recovery%20Access %20%28CERRA%29%20Framework.pdf. 21 Supply Chain Resilience Guide shipment and the destination. Planning teams should consider procedures for clearance, checkpoint access, and facility access. Steps include: • Determine who is responsible for granting access. • Coordinate communication approaches, including who will send what message and through which pathways.

• Develop message templates for resuming operation of supply chain nodes, activating emergency supply chain routes, and/or providing route security. • Determine if supply chain stakeholders/product transporters are aware of, and enrolled in, local emergency access programs. ‒ What gaps/inadequacies exist with these programs that may exclude critical organizations (e.g., private medical product suppliers that are often not considered emergency-access-eligible)?

Access Case Study: Impact to Community Water and Wastewater Services 11 Excerpts from Crisis Event Response and Recovery Access (CERRA) Framework Case Study Challenge: Coordinating access management and control during emergencies to support community water and wastewater services. Scenario Summary: A significant, geographically widespread incident has occurred that has affected public drinking water and wastewater treatment operations, as well as distribution and collection systems.

Local authorities have established checkpoints to restrict access to emergency zones across multiple jurisdictions, many of which contain water and wastewater utility assets that must be immediately assessed for damage or repaired to maintain water and wastewater services for critical infrastructure facilities, response and recovery operations, and public consumption requirements.

Access Challenges:  During emergencies, water and wastewater utility personnel may need the same degree of access as other first responders to enable emergency response operations or to maintain municipal and community lifelines (e.g., water and wastewater utility personnel often require prompt access to damaged assets both at the treatment facility and within the distribution or collection systems [e.g., pump or lift stations, damaged water lines], even though they may not be directly involved in the lifesaving portion of the incident).

 Local access program managers may need to coordinate access requirements with neighboring jurisdictions for water and wastewater utility assets dispersed across large areas, with additional support from state or Federal entities during large-scale incidents.

 Ensuring the ability to identify and support access by water and wastewater utility chemical suppliers, fuel delivery, and mutual assistance assets (e.g., assistance provided through the Emergency Management Assistance Compact) may be difficult if they are not pre-registered in the local access program or known to local authorities. 11 DHS Crisis Event Response and Recovery Access (CERRA) Framework, March 2018, https://www.dhs.gov/publication/crisis-event-response-and-recovery-access.

22 Supply Chain Resilience Guide • Pre-plan to contend with multiple access and reentry rules as a single supplier passes through different jurisdictions (for example, when the end destination allows reentry, but outer jurisdictions that must be traversed do not). ‒ Review initial access procedures to emergency supply chain nodes. ‒ Review re-entry access procedures to emergency supply chain nodes.  ‒ ‒ ‒ • Are there differences between initial access and re-entry?

Identify communication procedures:  When supply nodes resume operation.  For emergency routes.  When providing route security and/or escorts. Review route security and/or escort procedures.  Clearances for transportation, supply and distribution nodes.  Checkpoint access along emergency route.  Facility access. Consider Restricted Areas access and procedures. Consider waivers. Routes One way to analyze a supply chain is to review the normal means of transportation and the normal routes.

Supply chain logistic plans should identify main supply routes and alternative routes. Following a disaster, jurisdictions may waive special considerations such as weight and noise restrictions on routes (other restrictions, such as height for roads under bridges, and hazardous or flammable materials, may not be waived). Planning teams should consider debris management plans (who will clear which roads first, and where the debris will go). Steps include: • Review normal transportation.

• Review normal routes. • Identify main and alternative routes. • Review special considerations on route restrictions. • Consider waivers. • Consider varying modes, including the delivery of supplies into the region/jurisdiction by rail, marine, air. ‒ • What options exist to alter modes to continue product deliveries (e.g., switch to barge when bridge/tunnel access to a water-bound city is impeded)? Consider debris management. ‒ Partner with the private sector.

Consider if local entities can clear debris on their property to expedite supply chain recovery. 23 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Fuel Consider vehicle type and fuel in supply chain logistics, as different supply vehicles may require different types of fuel. Diesel is common, as well as gasoline and flex-fuel vehicles. Fuel access, stockpile, and re-supply procedures are crucial for supply chain recovery. Steps include: • Identify the vehicle fuel types required.

• Identify all support requirements needed to operate the fuel supply chain (e.g., backup generators, security). • Consider access to fuel at distribution centers. • Determine normal fuel operations. • Consider stockpiling emergency fuel. ‒ Identify when, how, and who will receive emergency fuel. Transportation Operators Supply chains function across air, land, and sea. Authorization and availability of pilots, drivers, and captains may require specific considerations for various supply chains.

For example, in healthcare supply chains, strict rules relate to who may transport certain products and the tracking and accountability of these products. Requirements for temperature and environmental controls may limit the transporters that can provide the service. Transportation operators often rely heavily on information technology and communications to direct their movements and deliveries. Consider what, if any, plans exist to address loss of these normal capabilities.

Large-scale disasters can significantly diminish available transport staff, drivers, and dispatchers. Union member operators and volunteer operators may have different regulations for operation than other private or public operators. Pre-standing MOUs with unions, volunteer organizations, and private/public sector entities may alleviate a lack of authorized drivers in an emergency. Transportation operators may need clearances to transport materials and/or enter facilities.

Personnel entering secure areas of maritime facilities and vessels require the Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC) 12 and fuel truck drivers require site-specific certifications before they can receive fuel at individual distribution terminals. Steps include: • 12 Review transportation operators’ regulations: ‒ Union members. ‒ Volunteers. ‒ Clearances required, including TWIC. Transportation Security Administration TWIC website, https://www.tsa.gov/for-industry/twic.

24 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Appendix A. Defense Production Act The Defense Production Act (DPA) 13 is the primary source of Presidential authorities to expedite and expand the supply of critical resources from the United States private sector to support national defense. The DPA broadly defines national defense to include emergency management preparedness, response, and recovery activities.

Emergency preparedness activities, which are a component of national defense, include measures designed or undertaken to: • Prepare for or minimize the effects of a hazard upon the civilian population; • Deal with the immediate emergency conditions, which the hazard would create; and • Effectuate emergency repairs to, or the emergency restoration of, vital utilities and facilities that the hazard destroyed or damaged.

DPA is a Federal authority that states, localities, tribes, and territories can petition to use, and approval is considered on a case-by-case basis. Private sector critical infrastructure owners can also petition for DPA use to protect and restore their critical infrastructure. DPA is primarily used for prioritizing resources both in the planning process and in response and recovery activities. The contracting process executes DPA priority ratings.

DPA priority-rated contracts receive preferential treatment from contractors and supporting subcontractors and suppliers to meet delivery dates and quantities. This authority, in effect, places these rated contracts at the head of the line, in front of all other unrated contracts. DPA encompasses the term “critical infrastructure protection and restoration” in its definition of national defense.

The DPA defines “critical infrastructure” to mean “any systems and assets, whether physical or cyber-based, so vital to the United States that the degradation or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on national security, including, but not limited to, national economic security and national public health or safety.” Requesting DPA Priority Ratings The process starts with a request from a state, local, tribal, or territorial government or owners/operators of private sector critical infrastructure for a priority rating.

DPA requests can go to different organizations in various ways, but during Presidentially declared disasters, requests should go to the Federal Coordinating Officer at the Joint Field Office. The Federal Coordinating Officer will determine whether to support the request and initiate coordination accordingly. Outside of a disaster, such as preparedness planning, the state, local, tribal, and territorial governments should refer to the FEMA Regional staff to initiate coordination.

13 The Defense Production Act of 1950, as Amended (50 U.S.C. App. 2061 et seq.) https://www.fema.gov/medialibrary/assets/documents/108022#. 25 Supply Chain Resilience Guide • Step 1 (Request) – The Federal Coordinating Officer should notify the supporting FEMA Region and the National Response Coordination Center (NRCC) of the request and provide comments on whether to approve the request or not.

• Step 2 (Operational Priority) – The Resource Support Section Chief in the NRCC identifies the stakeholders who should work together to determine if this should be an operational priority. In conjunction with these stakeholders, the Federal Coordinating Officer, and the supporting FEMA Region, the Resource Support Section Chief will determine if this request is an operational priority and whether to support the request.

• Step 3 (Approval) – If the request is approved, FEMA works with the appropriate Federal department to obtain a priority rating. The Federal Coordinating Officer will provide the rating to the jurisdiction or private sector organization requesting the priority rating. • Step 4 (Implementation) – The private sector organization or jurisdiction places the priority rating in its contracts in accordance with the applicable Federal statutes and regulations.

Establishing a Voluntary Agreement Voluntary agreements allow key business sectors that are likely to be severely impacted by catastrophic disasters, or suppliers of critical materials or services for disaster response and recovery, to coordinate emergency preparedness plans and actions.

A voluntary agreement allows cooperation among what otherwise may be business competitors to expedite or expand the supply of critical materials or services to meet national defense needs, including emergency preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation activities and critical infrastructure protection and restoration.

Sectors that could respond more effectively with coordinated emergency response plans might include, for example, data processing and storage for financial and other vital business records and construction for repair and rebuilding of damaged infrastructure.

The steps to establish a voluntary agreement include: • Step 1 (Request) – Forward request for voluntary agreements to the Federal Coordinating Officer, the primary Federal interface with jurisdictions and private sector owner/operators of critical infrastructure. The Federal Coordinating Officer should notify the supporting FEMA Region and the Resource Support Section in the NRCC of the request and comment on whether to approve the request.

• Step 2 (Sponsor) – The process for establishing a voluntary agreement starts with identifying a Federal sponsor for the private sector organizations that the agreement will represent. Contact the FEMA DPA Program Division at FEMA-OPPA-DPA@fema.dhs.gov or (202) 212-3441 for assistance finding a sponsor. • Step 3 (Initial Approval) – FEMA coordinates with the Department of Justice to obtain the initial approval from the Attorney General.

This approval allows the sponsor to consult with private interests about establishing an agreement. • Step 4 (Meetings) – Conduct publicly announced meetings to establish the agreement. • Step 5 (Final Approval) – The Attorney General provides final approval to implement the agreement, along with a finding that a voluntary agreement is needed (See 44 CFR 332.2 for more details). 26 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Appendix B.

Community Lifeline Framework Community lifelines provide a common lexicon to facilitate unity of purpose among the whole community (Federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial governments, and private sector and nongovernmental entities) to prioritize, sequence, and focus response efforts towards maintaining or restoring the most critical services and infrastructure. In the context of supply chain resilience, community lifelines identify critical focus areas for jurisdictions to consider.

Community lifelines also provide jurisdictions with a way to understand and examine complex (multifaceted) supply chains that require cross-sector coordination. This section presents questions and examples that may be helpful in jumpstarting a jurisdiction’s identification of the nodes, links, and flow related to the seven community lifelines: • Safety and Security • Food, Water, Sheltering • Health and Medical • Energy (Power & Fuel) • Communications • Transportation • Hazardous Material.

Safety and Security The Safety and Security lifeline supports responder and survivor safety and the continuity of government (including basic services, firefighting, and law enforcement). This community lifeline provides critical actions that enable the other lifelines to function. • • • What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline?

Examples: ‒ Emergency medical transportation, high-water vehicles, rescue rafts ‒ 911 Call Center operations, public safety communications network ‒ Fuel for public safety transportation and backup generation Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)? Examples: ‒ 911 Call Centers ‒ Police precincts, fire stations Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Police cruisers, fire suppression vehicles, ambulances, incident command post, base, and staging areas 27 Supply Chain Resilience Guide • ‒ Neighborhoods, private homes, schools, commercial properties, hospitals, clinics ‒ Forward-deployed professional safety and security personnel ‒ Disaster response and recovery shipments ‒ Access and re-entry points How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links? How is demand expressed?

How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow? What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?)

Examples: ‒ Surface transportation network, trucking, fueling, and related ‒ Demand is typically expressed through telecommunications ‒ Telecommunications dispatch is usually needed to sustain the flow Food, Water, Sheltering The Food, Water, Sheltering lifeline supports current and projected community needs for food, water, durable goods, and shelter capacity, as well as evacuations and water and agricultural infrastructure. • • • • What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline?

Examples: ‒ Fresh food, consumer packaged goods, other groceries ‒ Prepared food, bottled water, bulk water, other beverages ‒ Foods for infants and young children ‒ Residential housing market: builders, brokers, lenders, information resources ‒ Emergency shelters Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Grocery distribution centers, wholesalers, food processing facilities ‒ Institutional and commercial food distribution centers ‒ Preexisting houses, condominiums, and multifamily housing complexes Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Grocery stores, convenience stores, bodegas, and other food retailers ‒ Restaurants, fast-food outlets ‒ Shelters, feeding stations, commodity points of distribution (PODs) ‒ Real estate brokers, rental housing centers, online search providers How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links? How is demand expressed? How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow? What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?)

Examples: ‒ 28 Surface transportation network, trucking, fueling, and related Supply Chain Resilience Guide ‒ Cash, credit card, and Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card transactions 14 ‒ Readiness to receive, especially related to on-site electricity and personnel ‒ Readiness to receive commodities (e.g., bottled drinking water, packaged food), stage, and deliver to commodity PODs and end users Health and Medical The Health and Medical lifeline provides medical care, public health support, pre-hospital care, fatality management services, behavioral health services, and support to the medical industry to ensure life-saving and sustaining services are adequate to meet the needs of the impacted area.

• • • • What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline? Examples: ‒ Medical goods ‒ Pharmaceuticals ‒ Medical gases ‒ Medical professionals Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Medical goods and pharmaceutical distribution centers, corporate supply centers, warehouses, and refrigerated storage ‒ Hospital and other pharmacies ‒ Clinics and expeditionary emergency facilities ‒ Home healthcare providers Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Ambulances, incident command post, base, and staging areas ‒ Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, specialty treatment centers, home healthcare providers ‒ Emergency shelters, points of dispensing How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links? How is demand expressed? How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow? What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?)

Examples: ‒ Demand is typically expressed by telecommunications or by those in need physically presenting themselves at a demand node (e.g., hospital or clinic) ‒ Delivery requires medical professionals with diagnostic and treatment assets ‒ Sustained flow requires resupply of diagnostic and treatment assets (especially pharmaceuticals and medical goods), pure water, a clean physical environment, and some source of electricity, especially for diagnostic equipment 14 EBT is an electronic system that allows a recipient to authorize transfer of their government benefits from a Federal account to a retailer account to pay for products received.

See https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/whatelectronic-benefits-transfer-ebt. 29 Supply Chain Resilience Guide ‒ Delivery mode may include maritime, aviation, freight rail, and trucking fleet (independent drivers or corporate transportation company, truck yards) Energy (Power & Fuel) The Energy lifeline provides electric power, gas, and liquid fuel to support the needs of the whole community.

It includes electric power generation, transmission, and distribution systems, as well as gas and liquid fuel processing, transportation, and delivery systems. This lifeline supports the whole community’s response efforts by enabling all other community lifelines. • • • What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline?

Examples: ‒ Grid continuity or rapid repair, utility mutual aid, transformers, powerlines ‒ Backup generation pre-wired or in place ‒ Flow of fuel Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)? Examples: ‒ Fuel terminals, refineries, pipelines, racks ‒ Propane distributors, truck stops and other fuel retailers ‒ Electric utility mutual aid agreements, personnel, equipment, and processes Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Gas stations ‒ Federal, state, or private enterprise fuel depots ‒ Distribution substations  • 30 NOTE: While substation location is important, its associated service area is a far more effective piece of information for the purposes of dependency analysis and planning.

Attempting to identify specific service lines connecting an asset to a particular substation has value in certain cases (for example, when a single service line to a key facility identifies a single point of failure), but that can be a challenging proposition when dealing with multiple facilities. How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links? How is demand expressed? How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow?

What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?) Examples: ‒ Surface transportation network, trucking, fueling, and related ‒ Pipelines ‒ Demand is typically expressed through telecommunications ‒ Professional electricians, utility personnel, dispatch personnel Supply Chain Resilience Guide Communications The Communications lifeline supports the transmission of information through mechanisms such as broadband internet, ethernet, cellular networks, cable television, and radio broadcast networks.

It covers all types of communications necessary to effectively respond to and help survivors, including alerts and warnings, 911 and dispatch, and responder communications. This lifeline supports the whole community’s response efforts by enabling all other community lifelines. • • What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline?

Examples: ‒ Grid continuity, rapid repair, or backup generation with refueling ‒ Cell On Wheels (COW), Cell On Truck (COT), or cellular airframes (e.g., blimps) ‒ Fuel tankers with drivers, telecommunications repair personnel and trucks Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) facilities ‒ Internet Service Providers ‒ Data Centers and server farms  • • NOTE: This is challenging data to obtain and is of greatest value only when the location of the critical data to support infrastructure or supply chain operations is known. For example, a jurisdiction cannot prioritize restoration of a commercial cargo port’s cloud-based terminal operating system unless they know the data center that stores it.

Not all infrastructure owners know where their offsite data physically resides. Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)? Examples: ‒ Credit, debit, and EBT point-of-sale terminals at retailers ‒ 911 Call Centers ‒ Transportation dispatch and broker operations How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links? How is demand expressed? How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow?

What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?) Examples: ‒ High-speed fiber and wireless connections  ‒ NOTE: Fiber line routes are notoriously difficult to obtain with any accuracy; certain owners are more forthcoming than others. Cellular telephone provider cell sites  NOTE: While cell site location is important, its associated coverage area is most useful for dependency analysis.

‒ Widely distributed consumer demand ‒ Access to some source of electricity across the flow of demand and supply 31 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Transportation The Transportation lifeline enables the movement of goods and services to support the whole community. Transportation infrastructure generally includes highway/roadways, mass transit, rail, aviation, shipping, pipeline, and intermodal systems.

This lifeline supports the whole community’s response efforts by enabling all other community lifelines. • • • • What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline? Examples: ‒ Trucks and truckers ‒ Truck stops and other fuel providers ‒ Surface transportation network, including roads, rail, bridges, ports Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Transportation companies: wholly owned, dedicated fleets, third-party logistics (3PL) providers, package delivery, U.S. Mail ‒ Freight yards, staging lots, community of independent truckers ‒ Ports, intermodal facilities, wherever there is concentration of flow Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)? Examples: ‒ Food processing facilities ‒ Distribution centers ‒ Fuel retailers How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links?

How is demand expressed? How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow? What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?)

Examples: ‒ Surface, maritime, and air transportation networks ‒ Preexisting delivery contracts, spot-market calls, transportation brokers ‒ Refueling vehicles and vessels is essential to sustaining the flow Hazardous Material The Hazardous Material lifeline covers the management (including containment and removal) of all hazardous materials.

It focuses on ensuring that hazardous substance facilities, conveyance assets, wastewater systems, and incident debris, pollution, and contaminants do not require ongoing emergency responses to mitigate imminent or substantial threats to public health and welfare or the environment. • 32 What goods or services are essential to provide this lifeline?

Examples: ‒ Biochemical treatment and containment products ‒ Backup power generation and fuel Supply Chain Resilience Guide ‒ • • • Pre-identification of hazardous substance facilities Where do these goods or services originate (where are the supply nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Hazardous materials teams (local, state, Federal and private sector) ‒ Occupational and material safety professionals, both public and private sector ‒ Biochemical suppliers, heavy equipment sources, specialty extraction providers Where are these goods or services stored or deployed (where are the demand nodes)?

Examples: ‒ Treatment facilities (e.g., water, sewage) ‒ Hazardous waste storage facilities (e.g., coal ash, nuclear spent fuel pool) ‒ Biochemical production and processing facilities compromised by extreme events How are these goods or services delivered? (Where are the links? How is demand expressed? How do goods or services move from supply nodes to demand nodes? What is minimally needed to start the flow? What is minimally needed to sustain the flow?)

Examples: ‒ Surface transportation, maritime, and air may all be involved ‒ Demand is typically expressed by telecommunications ‒ Effective flow typically requires pre-identification, active monitoring, extensive mitigation, and rapid response facilitated by research, outreach, and exercises 33 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Appendix C. Supply Chain Resilience Engagement Checklist The following recommended actions help emergency managers foster long-term collaboration between the public and private sector stakeholders to support supply chain resilience.

 Identify perceived or known issues/obstacles that hinder the private sector from engaging in response and recovery efforts in coordination with the public sector. ‒ Identify issues per individual company (if not done so previously). ‒ Identify trends across the sector within community and/or region (if not done so previously).  Based on information gleaned from the Action Phase, form a “Task Force” of appropriate Private Sector Representatives.

‒ Identify representatives from each private sector company – if possible, ensure representation of both operators and decisions makers. ‒ Consider representatives from trade associations, Federal agencies, tribes, state agencies, county agencies, and city agencies.  Develop a “Task Force” Concept of Operations (CONOPS) or Charter outlining agreed-upon parameters for engagement during steady state operations and response or disaster operations.

The CONOPS/Charter could include: ‒ Overview ‒ Vision ‒ Mission Statement ‒ Area of Operation/ Geography ‒ Purpose and Scope ‒ Subcommittees (if applicable) ‒ Roles & Responsibilities ‒ ‒ Elections Objectives ‒ ‒ Quorum Timeframe for Objectives ‒ ‒ Communications/ Reporting Structure Membership & Meeting Schedule ‒ Decision Process.  Leverage the Task Force for information planning and assumption development.

 Conduct a workshop with the Task Force to determine public and private sector priorities. ‒ Determine ownership of priorities and potential solutions.  Host workshops/seminars, potentially with cross-sector representation, to address identified priorities. 34 ‒ Develop products to facilitate inclusive response and recovery efforts. ‒ Develop tactics and MOUs/Memoranda of Agreement (MOAs) to facilitate inclusive response and recovery efforts.

Supply Chain Resilience Guide ‒ Network Sector Task Force members with other Sector Task Force members to develop innovative options to address identified issues and priorities, as well as share lessons learned and best practices.  Host exercises to validate products, tactics, and agreements developed from workshops.  Provide training/outreach informing the private sector on the different opportunities and requirements to conduct business with the appropriate state agencies.

 Continue to facilitate the resilience-building actions developed from the Task Force. ‒ Host exercises (discussion- and operations-based). ‒ Host conferences and/or seminars. ‒ Provide/Host networking opportunities. 35 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Appendix D. Complex Supply Chain Example Demand and supply networks can be highly differentiated by product, region, and enterprise. Figure 5 shows a representation of the petroleum product supply chain.

In this representation, sourcing starts on the left, with inputs flowing toward outputs on the right (other terminology is sometimes used, for example “origins” are connected to “destinations,” or supply is “pulled” to demand, etc.). In the figure, several major production processes are given particular attention (e.g., refining) and multiple distribution options are highlighted (e.g., pipelines, maritime barge, tanker truck, rail).

These process steps are often said to represent specific “tiers”" in the supply chain. Further dis-aggregation of flow is possible that can help identify “hidden” participants and anticipate potential bottlenecks in supply. It can be helpful for emergency managers to know where the key supply chain functions serving their jurisdiction are located and who owns/operates these functions. They should ask: • How many of these functions are located in your jurisdiction or your region?

• To what extent – and how – does your jurisdiction depend on sources outside your region? As emergency managers especially know, maps are very helpful. However, a map is not the territory. Every helpful visualization of a supply chain tends to be over-simplified. For example, this visualization does not highlight dependencies (e.g., necessary electric power, chemical, and workforce inputs). Demand signals, including financial flows, are not shown.

In supply chain resilience, it can be very helpful to work with stakeholders to conceive and deploy models and maps that key participants agree represent an accurate representation of local/regional reality. 36 Supply Chain Resilience Guide Figure 5: Representation of a Petroleum Supply Chain 37 Supply Chain Resilience Guide This page intentionally left blank. 38

© 2024 International Monetary Fund WP/24/79 IMF Working Paper European Department This Is Going to Hurt: Weather Anomalies, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Prepared by Serhan Cevik and Gyowon Gwon* Authorized for distribution by Bernardin Akitoby April 2024 IMF Working Papers describe research in progress by the author(s) and are published to elicit comments and to encourage debate.

The views expressed in IMF Working Papers are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF management. ABSTRACT: As climate change accelerates, the frequency and severity of extreme weather events are expected to worsen and have greater adverse consequences for ecosystems, physical infrastructure, and economic activity across the world. This paper investigates how weather anomalies affect global supply chains and inflation dynamics.

Using monthly data for six large and well-diversified economies (China, the Euro area, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States) over the period 1997-2021, we implement a structural vector autoregressive model and document that weather anomalies could disrupt supply chains and subsequently lead to inflationary pressures.

Our results—based on high-frequency data and robust to alternative estimation methodologies—show that these effects vary across countries, depending on the severity of weather shocks and vulnerability to supply chain disruptions. The impact of weather shocks on supply chains and inflation dynamics is likely to become more pronounced with accelerating climate change that can have non-linear effects. These findings have important policy implications.

Central bankers should consider the impact of weather anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics to prevent entrenching second-round effects and de-anchoring of inflation expectations. More directly, however, governments can invest more for climate change adaptation to strengthen critical infrastructure and thereby minimize supply chain disruptions. RECOMMENDED CITATION: Cevik, S., and G. Gwon (2024).

“This Is Going to Hurt: Weather Anomalies, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation,” IMF Working Paper No. 24/79 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund).

JEL Classification Numbers: E32; F14; F62; F64; G15; G30; Q54 Keywords: Climate change; weather anomalies; temperature; supply chain pressures; inflation; structural VAR Author’s E-Mail Address: scevik@imf.org; gyowon.gwon@univ-paris13.fr * The authors would like to thank Yan Carriere-Swallow, Andrew Hodge, Geoffrey Keim, Samuel Pienknagura, Baoping Shang, Christoph Ungerer, and the participants of a seminar at the European Department of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for helpful comments and suggestions.

©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt Weather Anomalies, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Prepared by Serhan Cevik and Gyowon Gwon ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Contents Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................................ 3 I. Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 4 II.

Literature Review ................................................................................................................................... 6 III. Data Overview ........................................................................................................................................ 7 IV.

Econometric Strategy ......................................................................................................................... 11 V. Empirical Results ................................................................................................................................ 12 VI.

Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................... 24 References ......................................................................................................................................................... 25 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 2 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Executive Summary The world economy has experienced a series of unprecedented shocks over the past three years, disrupting supply chains, causing a deep recession, and pushing inflation to the highest level since the 1970s. While inflation is on a downward trajectory with economic activity on the mend, vulnerabilities persist.

One of the most significant risks to the global economy and financial markets is climate change. As human-induced climate change accelerates over the coming decades, greater frequency and severity of extreme weather conditions can have far-reaching adverse consequences for physical infrastructure and economic activity. There is convincing evidence that climate-related natural disasters have significant effects on inflation and economic growth.

An important channel of this relationship is the impact of weather anomalies—caused by climate change—on global supply chains in the production and distribution of goods and services. Disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing sharp increase in global inflation have highlighted the importance of risks to the complex and interdependent network of supply chains across the world.

With rising global temperatures, extreme weather events stress transportation infrastructure and highly connected global supply chains, interrupting production, causing shortages, and leading to higher prices. Demand-side factors certainly play a significant role in driving inflation, but this paper aims to close an important gap in the literature by investigating the impact of weather anomalies on global supply chains and inflation dynamics.

Using monthly data covering six large and well-diversified economies—China, the Euro area, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States—over the period 1997-2021, we implement a structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) model and trace the contemporaneous effects of weather anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt in the literature to investigate the impact of weather shocks on supply chain pressures and alternative measures of inflation using a SVAR model, which offers insights on how climate change could affect global supply networks and inflation dynamics beyond the sample of countries used in the analysis.

For robustness, we also implement the local projection (LP) method to trace the dynamic effects of temperature anomalies on supply chains and inflation over time. We find that weather anomalies could contribute to supply chain disruptions and subsequently lead to inflationary pressures.

Our results—based on high-frequency data and robust to alternative estimation methodologies—show significant heterogeneity across countries in the sample, which we attribute to differences in the severity of weather shocks and vulnerability to supply chain disruptions. The impact of weather shocks on supply chains and inflation dynamics is likely to become more pronounced with accelerating climate change that can have non-linear effects.

Although our empirical results do not always show a strong positive link between weather shocks and supply chain disruptions, due to, in part, the use of aggregated supply-side disruptions, this does not imply that we can be complacent about increasing weather anomalies. For instance, a severe drought has reduced water level considerably in Panama Canal, disrupting trade route connecting Asia and North America. Our results have important policy implications.

Central bankers should consider the persistent impact of weather anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics to prevent entrenching second-round effects and de-anchoring inflation expectations. More directly, however, governments can invest more for climate change adaptation to strengthen critical infrastructure and thereby minimize supply chain disruptions. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 3 IMF WORKING PAPERS I.

This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Introduction The world economy has experienced a multitude of shocks in recent years, disrupting global supply chains, causing a deep recession, and pushing inflation to the highest level since the 1970s. While inflation is on the decline from its peak of 11.6 percent in 2022 to 5.3 percent in 2023, long-term vulnerabilities persist.

One of the most significant risks to the global economy and financial markets is climate change. The increase in the global land temperature has reached more than 1.1 degrees Celsius (°C) compared with the preindustrial average, before human-induced climate change began to take effect (Figure 1).1 Projections show that accelerating climate change will raise the mean temperature above the 1.5°C threshold in the near term and by as much as 4°C over the next century absent a global green transition.

As climate change accelerates over the coming decades, greater frequency and severity of acute weather events can have far-reaching adverse consequences for physical infrastructure and economic activity (Stern 2007; IPCC 2007, 2014, 2019; 2021). There is convincing evidence that show climate-related natural disasters having significant effects on inflation and growth (Cevik and Jalles, 2023).

An important channel of transmission in this context is the complex and interdependent network of supply chains across the world, as shown by disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic (Bonadio et al., 2021; Binici et al., 2022; Celasun et al., 2022; Santacreu and LaBelle, 2022). With rising temperatures, extreme weather conditions will stress transportation infrastructure and highly-connected global supply chains—interrupting production, causing shortages, and leading to higher prices.2 Figure 2.

Global Temperature Anomalies Degrees Celsius 3 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 -0.5 -1 -1.5 2023 2016 2010 2004 1997 1991 1984 1978 1971 1965 1959 1952 1946 1939 1933 1927 1920 1914 1907 1901 1894 1888 1882 1875 1869 1862 1856 1850 -2 Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The average global temperature in 2023 was already about 1.5°C warmer than that of the pre-industrial period.

However, a temporary increase of 1.5°C is different from the Paris Agreement target of limiting long-term global warming to 1.5°C by 2100. 2 Supply chain disruptions persisting a month or longer already occur every 3.7 years on average (Lund et al., 2020).

These disruptions are not just caused by hurricanes and tornadoes, but also by severe drought due to intense heat waves, for example, in the Panama Canal and the Rhine river, which are the only passageway for container vessels between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans and one of the most important inland waterways in Europe, respectively. Carriere-Swallow et al.

(2023) find that higher shipping costs due to supply chain disruptions have a significant effect on domestic inflation in a sample of 46 countries. 1 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 4 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Conceptually, the effects of weather anomalies, as measured by unseasonal temperature deviations in this paper, can evolve through different direct and indirect transmission mechanisms, with opposing effects simultaneously on demand and supply (Somanathan et al., 2021; Cevik and Jalles, 2023; Ciccarelli, Kuik, and Hernández, 2023).

First, weather shocks can result in higher energy demand and prices, which could in turn lead to second-round effects on non-energy prices across the economy. Second, large weather fluctuations can lower individual productivity in climate-sensitive sectors of the economy and alter inflation dynamics. Third, weather shocks can cause supply chain disruptions, instigating a productivity shortfall, increasing the cost of transportation and production, and consequently contributing to higher inflation.

In this complex context, we examine how the increasing frequency and severity of weather anomalies affect supply chains and inflation dynamics (Figure 2). Figure 2. Transmission of Temperature Shocks This paper aims to close an important void in the literature by providing an empirical analysis of how weather anomalies—measured by unseasonal deviation in temperature from the historical average—affect supply chain pressures and inflation dynamics.

Using monthly data covering six large economies—China, the Euro area, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States—over the period 1997-2021, we estimate a set of structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) models for each country in the sample and trace the contemporaneous effects of weather shocks on country-specific supply chain pressures and inflation.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt in the literature to investigate the impact of temperature anomalies on supply chain disruptions and alternative measures of inflation using a SVAR model, which offers insights on how climate change could affect global supply networks and inflation dynamics beyond the sample of countries used in the analysis.

For robustness, we also implement the local projection (LP) method to trace the dynamic effects of temperature anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics over time. We find that weather anomalies could disrupt supply chains and subsequently lead to inflationary pressures.

Our results—based on high-frequency data and robust to alternative estimation methodologies—show significant heterogeneity across countries in the sample, which we attribute to differences in the severity of weather shocks and vulnerability to supply chain disruptions. The impact of weather shocks on supply chains and inflation dynamics is likely to become more pronounced with accelerating climate change that can have non-linear effects.

Although our empirical results do not always show a strong positive link between weather shocks and supply chain disruptions, due to, in part, the use of aggregated supply-side disruptions, this does not imply that we can be complacent about increasing weather anomalies. For instance, a severe drought has reduced water level considerably in Panama Canal, disrupting trade route connecting Asia and North America. Our results have important policy implications.

Central bankers should consider the persistent impact of weather anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics to prevent entrenching second-round effects and INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 5 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation de-anchoring inflation expectations.

More directly, however, governments can invest more for climate change adaptation to strengthen critical infrastructure and thereby minimize supply chain disruptions. The remainder of this study is structured as follows. Section II describes the data used in the analysis. Section III introduces the salient features of our econometric strategy and presents the empirical results. Finally, Section IV offers concluding remarks with policy implications. II.

Literature Review This paper contributes to a growing branch of the literature focusing on the impact of climate change on economic activity and financial markets.3 Starting with Nordhaus (1991; 1992) and Cline (1992), aggregate damage functions are widely used to analyze the relationship between climatic conditions and economic developments.

Although the identification of macroeconomic effects of annual variation in climatic conditions is a difficult empirical undertaking, Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999), Nordhaus (2006), and Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) observe that higher temperatures result in a significant reduction in economic growth in developing countries.

Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel (2015) corroborate this finding and determine that higher temperatures would have a greater damage in countries that are concentrated in geographic areas with hotter climates. Using large datasets, Acevedo et al. (2018), Burke and Tanutama (2019), Kahn et al.

(2021), and Akyapi, Bellon, and Massetti (2022) show that the long-term economic impact of weather anomalies, such as persistent changes in the temperature above or below the historical norm, is not homogenous across countries and that economic growth responds nonlinearly to extreme temperature.

It is also well documented that increasing frequency and severity of climate-related natural disasters affect economic development (Loyaza et al., 2012; Noy, 2009; Raddatz, 2009; Skidmore and Toya, 2002), reduce the accumulation of human capital (Cuaresma, 2010) and worsen external balances (Gassebner, Kesk, and The, 2006).

More recently, Cevik and Jalles (2020; 2021; 2022) show that climate change vulnerability has significant effects on the cost of government borrowing and the probability of sovereign debt default, especially in developing countries.

Similarly, Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016) and IMF (2020) find that risks associated with climate change—as proxied by temperature increases—have a negative effect on asset valuations, while Bernstein, Gustasson, and Lewis (2019) show that real estate exposed to the risk of sea level rise is priced at a discount relative to otherwise similar unexposed houses.

Focusing on the U.S., Painter (2020) finds that counties more likely to be affected by climate change pay more in underwriting fees and initial yields to issue long-term municipal bonds compared to counties unlikely to be affected by climate change. There is a small but growing literature on the impact of climate change on consumer price inflation.

A few studies look at the impact of natural hazards on prices (Parker, 2018; Heinen, Khadan, and Strobl, 2019), while there is almost no research on the effect of extreme weather events including temperature deviations, apart from studies focusing on specific sectors of activity (De Winne and Peersman, 2021) or a single country (Kim, Matthes, and Phan, 2022).

Studying how extreme temperatures affect various measures of inflation in 48 advanced and emerging economies during the period 1951–1980, Faccia, Parker, and Stracca (2021) find that higher temperatures play a non-negligible role in driving price developments, especially for emerging market economies. Similarly, Kabundi, Mlachila, and Yao (2022) analyze how climate shocks affect consumer prices 3 Tol (2018) provides a recent overview of this expanding literature.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 6 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation and find that the impact depends on the type and intensity of shocks, the level of income, and the type of monetary policy regime.

Finally, in a recent study covering 173 countries over the period from 1970 to 2020, Cevik and Jalles (2023) show that climate-related natural disasters have significant effects on consumer price inflation and economic growth. The literature on supply chain pressures and inflation is limited, but also growing fast after the COVID-19 pandemic. Benigno et al. (2022) introduces a new index of global supply chain pressures and find a significant effect on inflation during the pandemic period.

With a model-based approach, Di Giovanni et al. (2022) shows that supply bottlenecks in international trade contribute to higher inflation. Using data from international container trade, Finck and Tillmann (2022) find that global supply chain disruptions caused by the Tohoku earthquake in 2011, the Suez Canal obstruction in 2021, and the Shanghai backlog in 2022 caused a decline in real economic activity and an increase in consumer prices in the euro area.

LaBelle and Santacreu (2022) analyze the effect of supply chain pressures on producer prices in the US and conclude that about one-fifth of the producer price inflation. Likewise, Kabaca and Tuzcuoglu (2023) analyze the contribution of supply-side forces to consumer price inflation in the US and show that global supply chain and oil price shocks are the most principal factors during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Using a panel of 29 sub-Saharan African countries, Andriantomanga, Bolhuis, and Hakobyan (2023) find that an increase in global supply chain pressures leads to a significant increase in consumer price inflation. III. Data Overview The vector of endogenous variables includes three variables: weather anomalies, supply chain pressures and consumer price inflation.

We assemble a dataset of monthly observations covering six countries (China, the Euro area, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States) over the period 1997–2021. The sample selection is determined by the availability of country-specific data on supply chain pressures.

Inflation is computed as the year-on-year percentage change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) as follows: 𝜋𝑖,𝑡 = ( 𝐶𝑃𝐼𝑖,𝑡 𝐶𝑃𝐼𝑖,𝑡−12 ) ∗ 100 (1) where 𝜋𝑖,𝑡 denotes inflation in country i at time t based on headline CPI or core CPI, drawn from the World Bank’s global database of inflation (Ha, Kose, and Ohnsorge, 2023). To mitigate outliers and handle the possible negative values of inflation, we resort to an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, i.e., 2 ln (𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + √𝜋𝑖,𝑡 + 1).

We measure country-specific supply chain disruptions with the Supply Chain Pressures Index (SCPI) constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (Benigno et al., 2022). The SCPI is a novel measure of supply chain pressures based on monthly information from 27 indicators including international transportation costs, port congestions, shortage of containers and drivers, and supply chain-related components of the Purchasing Managers’ Index surveys for manufacturing firms.

The SCPI is measured in standard deviations from the sample average and normalized to have an average value of zero over the full time series. Accordingly, a reading above zero implies an increase in supply chain disruptions relative to the average. Weather anomalies are measured as a deviation of monthly mean temperature from the historical average, which are obtained from the World Bank’s Climate Change Knowledge Portal.

We follow the literature and INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 7 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation calculate monthly deviations in temperature as 𝑇𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑇𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑇𝑖,(𝑡) in country i at time t. In other words, weather anomalies are derived from the difference between the temperature observation at time t and the historical average for that month during the reference period of 1901-1996.

Given that the SCPI begins in 1997, we choose the reference year for weather anomalies from 1996 backward. For the Euro area, we aggregate 19 countries to calculate a GDP-weighted average series of temperature deviations to account for the differences in country size. To develop a more granular analysis, we also focus on extreme weather events defined as an anomaly that is large relative to historical variation.

Descriptive statistics, presented in Table 1, show significant variation across countries and over time. First, we observe that the deviation of monthly mean temperature from its historical average ranges from 0.86°C in the United Kingdom to 1.26°C in Japan, with an upward trend across all countries. Second, supply chain pressures as measured by the SCPI vary from -0.02 in Japan to -0.01 in the Euro Area.

Third, headline inflation moves from an average of 0.06 percent in Japan to 1.49 percent in Korea, while core inflation stands at -0.11 percent in Japan and 1.44 percent in the United States. For the appropriate implementation of the SVAR model, it is necessary to analyze the time-series properties of the data to avoid spurious results. The stationarity of all variables is checked by applying the augmented Dickey-Fuller (1981), which is widely used in literature.

These results, presented in Appendix Table A1, indicate that all series are stationary after logarithmic transformation. Table 1.

Summary Statistics Temperature Mean Variance Minimum Maximum Supply chain pressures Mean Variance Minimum Maximum Headline Inflation Mean Variance Minimum Maximum Core Inflation Mean Variance Minimum Maximum China EA Japan Korea UK US 0.9592 0.7228 -1.7583 3.9747 1.2417 1.3944 -2.4578 4.0698 1.2687 0.7898 -1.7947 3.9183 1.1846 1.3405 -3.1941 4.3788 0.8603 0.9623 -3.7659 3.2510 0.9203 0.8936 -1.8784 3.7734 -0.0216 0.9381 -1.7932 4.3582 -0.0098 0.9931 -3.2800 3.5000 -0.0224 0.9330 -2.7560 3.6264 -0.0177 0.9605 -7.1594 3.1049 -0.0122 0.9827 -4.1183 3.3160 -0.0192 0.9523 -1.8996 4.0856 1.0826 1.1059 -1.5297 2.8716 1.1642 0.3301 -0.5688 2.3124 0.0618 0.5586 -1.6528 2.0192 1.4928 0.3863 -0.4141 2.9522 1.3602 0.1640 0.1985 2.2814 1.4024 0.4095 -1.4863 2.6493 0.9568 0.3686 -1.2995 1.6187 1.1459 0.0947 0.3900 1.7191 -0.1151 0.4221 -1.2507 1.6746 1.3880 0.3173 -0.6502 2.5116 1.2145 0.1284 -0.1288 2.0479 1.4493 0.0611 0.6184 2.4044 Source: Authors’ calculations.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 8 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 3. Country-Specific Weather Anomalies Monthly Temperature Anomalies 5 4 China Euro Area Japan Korea UK US 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 1997 1999 2000 2002 2004 2005 2007 2008 2010 2011 2013 2015 2016 2018 2019 2021 Note: Weather anomalies are measured by monthly deviations in temperature from the historical average.

EA is Euro Area counties whose temperature deviation is calculated based on the weighted average, with GDP as a weight. Source: World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal; authors’ calculations. Figure 4. Country-Specific Supply Chain Pressures Monthly Supply Chain Pressures 6 China Euro Area Japan Korea UK US 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 1997 1999 2000 2002 2004 2005 2007 2008 2010 2011 2013 2015 2016 2018 2019 2021 Note: Supply chain pressures are measured in standard deviations from the sample average.

Source: Benigno et al. (2022). INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 9 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 5. Headline CPI Percent (year-on-year) 4 China 3 Euro Area Japan Korea UK US 2 1 0 -1 -2 1997 1999 2000 2002 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2011 2012 2014 2015 2017 2018 2020 2021 Note: Monthly year-on-year inflation is subject to an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation.

Source: World Bank; authors’ calculations. Figure 6. Core CPI Percent (year-on-year) 3 2.5 China Euro Area Japan Korea UK US 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 -0.5 -1 -1.5 1997 1999 2000 2002 2004 2005 2007 2008 2010 2011 2013 2015 2016 2018 2019 2021 Note: Monthly year-on-year inflation is subject to an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. Source: World Bank; authors’ calculations. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 10 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation IV. Econometric Strategy The empirical objective of this paper is to estimate the impact of weather anomalies—as measured by temperature deviations—on supply chain disruptions and alternative measures of inflation, using monthly data covering six large economies (China, the Euro area, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States) over the period 1997–2021.

To gain better insights into the dynamic relationship between climate change, supply chain disruptions and alternative measures of inflation, we implement a three-variable SVAR model and resort to the Cholesky decomposition to orthogonalize the reduced-form residuals that impose causal chains in this framework. We are interested in how temperature shocks affect supply chains and inflation dynamics, which are also partly determined by supply chain disruptions.

In our SVAR framework, we assume that temperature anomalies are strictly exogenous, and that no variable could influence the weather variable. One may argue that temperature anomalies are indeed an outcome of human activity, but the anthropogenic impact on weather anomalies is a slow-moving process over centuries (Ciccarelli, Kuik, and Hernández, 2023).

Given that our focus is the shortrun effect of temperature shocks on supply chain pressures and inflation, it is less likely that supply chain pressures and inflation affect weather anomalies. Our identification of temperature shocks is based on the idea that weather anomalies cause supply chain disruptions that lead to changes in transportation costs and crossborder shipment quantities.

Accordingly, in this paper, we use the identification assumption that weather anomalies cause supply chain disruptions that in turn reduce the supply of goods and services and lead to higher inflation.

We estimate the AB model SVAR specification for each country separately as follows (Lütkepohl, 2005): (2) 𝑝 𝐴𝑋𝑡 = ∑𝑗=1 Π𝑗 𝑋𝑡−𝑗 + 𝐵𝜀𝑡 in which 𝑋𝑡 is a 3 x 1 vector of endogenous variables including weather anomalies (as measured by temperature deviations), the country-specific SCPI and headline or core inflation, subject to an inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, at time t. 𝜀𝑡 is an independent and identically distributed random vector with variance equal to the identity matrix of dimension of 3.

We omit constant for simplicity.

Under these restrictions, we specify the SVAR model with the 3x3 matrix as below: 1 𝐴 = [0 0 𝑎1 1 0 𝑎2 𝑎3 ] 1 (3) Π𝑗 is a 3x3 matrix such that 𝑦 𝑦 𝜋𝑦,𝑗 Π𝑗 = [ 0 0 𝜋𝑠,𝑗 𝑠 𝜋𝑠,𝑗 0 𝑦 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 𝑠 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 ] 𝜏 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 (4) Given that the A matrix is upper triangular, its inverse is also upper triangular and corresponds to 1 𝐴−1 = [0 0 −𝑎1 1 0 𝑎1 𝑎3 − 𝑎2 −𝑎3 ] 1 (5) Hence, the reduced form of our model is as follows: 𝑝 𝑋𝑡 = ∑𝑗=1 𝐴−1 Π𝑗 𝑋𝑡−𝑗 + 𝐴−1 𝐵𝜀𝑡 (6) INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 11 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation 𝑦 𝜋𝑦,𝑗 −1 Φ𝑗 = 𝐴 Π𝑗 = [ 0 0 𝑦 𝑦 𝜋𝑠,𝑗 − 𝑎1 𝜋𝑠,𝑗 𝑠 𝜋𝑠,𝑗 0 𝑦 𝑦 𝜏 𝜏 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 − 𝑎1 (𝜋𝑠,𝑗 − 𝑎3 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 ) − 𝑎2 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 𝑠 𝜏 ] 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 − 𝑎3 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 𝜏 𝜋𝜏,𝑗 (7) This implies that Φ𝑗 is also upper triangular, and we can therefore directly impose those restrictions onto the reduced form coefficients. The B matrix is a diagonal matrix.

For the optimal lag length of the SVAR model for each country, we resort to the SIC criteria that indicates 1 to 2 lags depending on the country.

V. Empirical Results In this section, we provide a visual presentation of the impulse response of supply chain pressures and inflation to temperature shocks in terms of one standard deviation over the 24-month horizon, together with corresponding 68 percent confidence intervals.4 In Figure 7, we begin with the impact of weather shocks on supply chain pressures in six economies that we analyze.

These results indicate that a larger temperature deviation with respect to the historical average tends to exert upward pressure on supply chain pressures. The estimated coefficients are economically intuitive, but not statistically significant for all countries in the sample.

Quantitatively, we find that a 1°C increase in temperature with respect to historical average increases supply chain pressures by roughly 0.3 and 0.6 standard deviation after 2 years in China, Korea and the United States, respectively. On the other hand, the impact of weather shocks on supply chain pressures appears to be negligible in the Euro Area, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

Altogether, these findings confirm that weather shocks could cause greater supply chain disruptions in a non-linear fashion as climate change accelerates. It is also important to highlight the components forming the supply chain pressures. As described in the previous section, the SCPI is constructed based on shipping rates, air freight prices, and the sub-components of the PMI, such as delivery time, backlogs, and purchased stocks.

These components tend to be affected more by, for instance, oil price fluctuations and port congestion that have a direct influence on supply chain pressures. Thus, the share of weather shocks explaining supply chain pressures might be smaller than what we would have expected. In addition, our results may have been contaminated by the unprecedented COVID19 pandemic period, which we exclude as a robustness check in the next section.

In Figures 8 and 9, we present the impact of supply chain pressures on headline and core inflation, respectively, in each economy. There is a clear upward pressure on headline inflation across all countries, except Korea.

Quantitatively, a one-standard deviation shock of supply chain pressures on inflation is associated with large and persistent increases in headline inflation in China, the United Kingdom and the United States, amounting to about 1.3 percent, 0.7 percent, and 1.5 percent, respectively, over the 24-month period.

The magnitude of this supply-chain effect on headline inflation is significantly smaller in the Euro Area and Japan, and supply chain pressures do not appear to have an adverse effect in the case of Korea. However, we should note that inflation in Korea may have been affected to a significant extent by the Asian financial crisis (1997-1999) that disrupted supply chains.

After excluding the Asian financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic, we find that greater supply chain pressures lead to higher inflation in Korea (Appendix Figure 1A). We also observe that the impact of supply chain disruptions on core inflation follows a similar pattern (except for Japan), with considerably lower estimated coefficients (except for the United States). 4 We estimate 2,000 bootstrapped error bans for the impulse response coefficients.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 12 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Finally, in Figures 10 and 11, we present the direct impact of weather shocks on headline and core inflation, respectively, for each economy separately. These statistically insignificant results yield an ambiguous picture of the relationship between temperature shocks and inflation dynamics.

This should not be surprising since our sample consists of six large and well-diversified economies where inflation dynamics are shaped by more powerful domestic and global factors. It is also important to note that higher temperatures may have a positive effect on agricultural output and depress energy demand, which in turn lowers inflation pressures. As Lucidi et al. (2022) argue, warmer winters decrease energy demand more than warmer summers raise it.

Therefore, a decline in inflation could result from reduced energy demand. Nevertheless, with accelerating climate change, there is also an increase in the volatility of weather patterns, which we find to be associated with supply chain disruptions and consequently higher inflation. Figure 7. Weather Shocks and Supply Chain Pressures Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of supply chain pressures to temperature shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue.

Estimates of the Euro Area and China began from December 2001 and January 2006, respectively, to December 2021. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 13 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 8.

Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation: Headline CPI Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to supply chain pressures in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Figure 9. Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation: Core CPI Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of core inflation to supply chain pressures in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue.

Estimates of the Euro Area and China began from December 2001 and January 2006, respectively, to December 2021. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 14 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 10.

Weather Shocks and Inflation: Headline CPI Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Figure 11. Weather Shocks and Inflation: Core CPI Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of core inflation to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue.

Estimates of the Euro Area and China began from December 2001 and January 2006, respectively, to December 2021. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 15 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation VI.

Robustness Checks To check the robustness of our baseline results, we estimate the model (i) for a panel of six countries in our sample, (ii) for the periods excluding the COVID-19 pandemic and pre- and post-global financial crisis, (iii) using the cyclical component of inflation. First, we implement the LP method developed by Jordà (2005) to capture the dynamic effects of temperature anomalies on supply chains and inflation over time in a panel setting.

The LP approach is a flexible alternative to SVAR vector as it does not constrain the shape of IRFs. We follow our previous causal chains for the panel LP estimations. Figure 12 displays that supply chain pressures exert upward pressure on headline inflation, which is consistent with our previous results and our intuitions. We see a sharp rise in headline inflation induced by supply chain pressures, and it declines rapidly after one year.

This indicates that supply-side shocks are not persistent in five large countries and the Euro Area. In contrast, temperature shocks rather reduce inflation, which aligns with our previous results. In addition, we have dropped the COVID-19 pandemic period (2020-2021), and the results are qualitatively the same (results not shown here to save space). Second, we estimate the countries without the COVID-19 pandemic periods (2020-2021) using the SVAR for each country (Figures 13, 14, and 15).

Given the unprecedented impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, it may have affected inflation that may not be explained by weather anomalies and supply chain pressures. The results suggest that weather shocks do not generally affect supply chain pressures. In contrast, we see that supply chain pressures raise inflation in most countries, and the negative relationship between supply chain Figure 12.

Weather Shocks on Supply Chain Pressures and Headline Inflation: Panel Setting Note: Blue and red lines indicate an impulse of temperature and supply chain shocks, respectively. 68% confidence interval is included, with country fixed effects, according to the LP method. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 16 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation pressures and inflation in Korea is due to the Asian financial crisis, as explained in the baseline results. When it comes to weather shocks and inflation, we see that the estimation outcomes are also similar to the baseline estimates. Accordingly, the COVID-19 pandemic did not considerably alter the baseline estimates.

Third, since inflation and supply chain pressures in respective countries are affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and shocks specific to each country, we attempt to account for it. For instance, the Asian financial crisis considerably affected inflation and supply chain pressures in Asian countries. The European debt crisis from 2009 to mid-2010s also impacted inflation and supply chain pressures in the Euro Area.

The 2008-2009 global financial crisis affected all the countries considered in this study. We, therefore, re-estimate each country with the SVAR and divide the time into two periods. First, we run from January 2000 to December 2007 to circumvent the Asian and global financial crisis. Second, we run from January 2010 to December 2019 to avoid the 2008 global financial crisis shock and the COVID-19 pandemic. Figure 13.

Weather Shocks and Supply Chain Pressures, Without COVID-19 Pandemic Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of supply chain pressures to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates of the Euro Area and China began from December 2001 and January 2006, respectively, to December 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic period (2020-2021) is dropped. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 17 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 14. Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation, Without COVID-19 Pandemic Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to supply chain pressures in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates of the Euro Area and China began from December 2001 and January 2006, respectively, to December 2019.

The COVID-19 pandemic period (2020-2021) is dropped. Figure 15. Weather Shocks and Inflation, Without COVID-19 Pandemic Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to weather anomalies in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates of the Euro Area and China began from December 2001 and January 2006, respectively, to December 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic period (2020-2021) is dropped. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 18 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation We see that the estimation outcomes in different periods show contrasting results (Figures 16-21). First, we find that weather anomalies could raise supply chain pressures before 2008, particularly in the US, whereas they have no impact on it after (excluding the COVID-19 pandemic period).

This implies that supply chain pressures in recent periods have been driven more significantly by factors, such as energy prices and delays in delivery of parts and components. Second, the effects of supply chain pressures on inflation are statistically more significant after 2008 in four countries (China, Korea, the UK, and the US) than before (China and Japan).

Our intuition is the growing demand for manufactured goods combined with the rising global value chain participation of the countries considered. Third, weather anomalies could raise inflation before 2008, particularly in the US, but it has no impact on inflation generally, or it reduces it after 2008. Fourth, we decompose inflation into cyclical and trend components by applying the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Our baseline results could pick up trend inflation, which has declined over time.

Although the falling trend inflation would be more significant in Japan, we use the cyclical component of inflation for all countries by eliminating the trend component for robustness. Our results are broadly similar to the baseline results. One difference is that weather shocks could increase the cyclical component of inflation in the US for about three months.

Again, the negative relationship between supply chain pressures and the cyclical component of inflation in Korea is driven by the Asian financial crisis in 1998. We see a positive relationship when this period is removed, like in Appendix Figure A1. Figure 16. Weather Shocks and Supply Chain Pressures: January 2000-December 2007 Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of supply chain pressures to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue.

Estimates began from January 2000 to December 2007. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 19 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 17. Supply Chain Pressures and Headline Inflation: January 2000-December 2007 Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to supply chain pressures in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue.

Estimates began from January 2000 to December 2007. Figure 18. Weather Shocks and Headline Inflation: January 2000-December 2007 Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from January 2000 to December 2007. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 20 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 19. Weather Shocks and Supply Chain Pressures: January 2010-December 2019 Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of supply chain pressures to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from January 2010 to December 2019. Figure 20.

Supply Chain Pressures and Headline Inflation: January 2010-December 2019 Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to supply chain pressures in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from January 2010 to December 2019. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 21 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 21.

Weather Shocks and Headline Inflation: January 2010-December 2019 Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of headline inflation to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from January 2010 to December 2019. Figure 22.

Weather Shocks and Supply Chain Pressures: Cyclical Part of Headline Inflation Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of supply chain pressures to weather shocks in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from September 1997 to December 2019. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 22 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Figure 23.

Supply Chain Pressures and Cyclical Part of Headline Inflation Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of supply chain pressures to cyclical component of headline inflation in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from September 1997 to December 2019. Figure 24.

Weather Anomalies and Cyclical Component of Headline inflation Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of cyclical component of headline inflation to weather anomalies in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. Estimates began from September 1997 to December 2019. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 23 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation VII.

Conclusion The world economy has experienced a series of unprecedented shocks over the past three years, disrupting supply chains, causing a deep recession, and pushing inflation to the highest level since the 1970s. While inflation is on a downward trajectory with economic activity on the mend, vulnerabilities persist. One of the most significant risks to the global economy and financial markets is climate change.

As human-induced climate change accelerates over the coming decades, greater frequency and severity of extreme weather conditions can have far-reaching adverse consequences for physical infrastructure and economic activity. There is convincing evidence that climate-related natural disasters have significant effects on inflation and economic growth.

An important channel of this relationship is the impact of weather anomalies—caused by climate change—on global supply chains in the production and distribution of goods and services. Disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing sharp increase in global inflation have highlighted the importance of risks to the complex and interdependent network of supply chains across the world.

With rising global temperatures, extreme weather events stress transportation infrastructure and highly-connected global supply chains, interrupting production, causing shortages, and leading to higher prices. Demand-side factors certainly play a significant role in driving inflation, but this paper aims to close an important gap in the literature by investigating the impact of weather anomalies on global supply chains and inflation dynamics.

Using monthly data covering six large and well-diversified economies—China, the Euro area, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States—over the period 1997-2021, we implement a SVAR model and trace the contemporaneous effects of weather anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt in the literature to investigate the impact of weather shocks on supply chain pressures and alternative measures of inflation using a SVAR model, which offers insights on how climate change could affect global supply networks and inflation dynamics beyond the sample of countries used in the analysis. We find that weather anomalies could disrupt supply chains and subsequently lead to inflationary pressures.

Our results—based on high-frequency data and robust to alternative estimation methodologies—show significant heterogeneity across countries in the sample, which we attribute to differences in the severity of weather shocks and vulnerability to supply chain disruptions. The impact of weather shocks on supply chains and inflation dynamics is likely to become more pronounced with accelerating climate change that can have non-linear effects.

Although our empirical results do not always show a strong positive link between weather shocks and supply chain disruptions, due to, in part, the use of aggregated supply-side disruptions, this does not imply that we can be complacent about increasing weather anomalies. For instance, a severe drought has reduced water level considerably in Panama Canal, disrupting trade route connecting Asia and North America. Our results have important policy implications.

Central bankers should consider the persistent impact of weather anomalies on supply chains and inflation dynamics to prevent entrenching second-round effects and de-anchoring inflation expectations. More directly, however, governments can invest more for climate change adaptation to strengthen critical infrastructure and thereby minimize supply chain disruptions. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 24 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation References Akyapi, B., M. Bellon, and E. Massetti (2022). “Estimating Macro-Fiscal Effects of Climate Shocks From Billions of Geospatial Weather Observations,” IMF Working Paper No. 22/156 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Andriantomanga, Z., M. Bolhuis, and S. Hakobyan (2023).

“Global Supply Chain Disruptions: Challenges for Inflation and Monetary Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa,” IMF Working Paper No. 23/39 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Auerbach, A., and Y. Gorodnichenkom (2013). “Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy,” American Economic Review, Vol. 103, pp. 141–146. Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and M. Ochoa (2016). “Price of Long-Run Temperature Shifts in Capital Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 22529 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Benigno, G., J. di Giovanni, J. Groen, and A. Noble (2022) “The GSCPI: A New Barometer of Global Supply Chain Pressures,” FRB of New York Staff Report N0. 1017 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York). Bernstein, A., M. Gustafson, and R. Lewis (2019). “Disaster on the Horizon: The Price Effect of Sea Level Rise,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 134, pp. 253–272.

Binici, M., S. Centorrino, S. Cevik, and G. Gwon, 2022, “Here Comes the Change: The Role of Global and Domestic Factors in Post-Pandemic Inflation in Europe,” IMF Working Paper No. 22/241 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Bonadio, B., Z. Huo, A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2021). “Global Supply Chains in the Pandemic,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 133, 103534. Burke, M., and V. Tanutama (2019). “Climatic Constraints on Aggregate Economic Output,” NBER Working Paper No.

25779 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research). Burke, M., S. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015). “Global Nonlinear Effect of Temperature on Economic Production,” Nature, Vol. 527, pp. 235–239. Carriere-Swallow, Y., P. Deb, D. Furceri, D. Jimenez, and J. Ostry (2023). “Shipping Costs and Inflation,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 130,102771. Celasun, O., N. Hansen, A. Mineshima, M. Spector, and J. Zhou (2022).

“Supply Bottlenecks: Where, Why, How Much, and What Next?,” IMF Working Paper No. 22/31 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Cevik, S., and J. Jalles (2020). “Feeling the Heat: Climate Shocks and Credit Ratings,” IMF Working Paper No. 20/286 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Cevik, S., and J. Jalles (2021). “An Apocalypse Foretold: Climate Shocks and Sovereign Defaults,” Open Economies Review, Vol. 3, pp 89–108. Cevik, S., and J. Jalles (2022).

“This Changes Everything: Climate Shocks and Sovereign Bonds,” Energy Economics, Vol. 107, 105856. Cevik, S., and J. Jalles (2023). “Eye of the Storm: The Impact of Climate Shocks on Inflation and Growth,” IMF Working Paper No. 23/87 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Ciccarelli, M., F. Kuik, and C. Hernández (2023). “The Asymmetric Effects of Weather Shocks on Euro Area Inflation,” ECB Working Paper No. 2798 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank). Cline, W. (1992).

The Economics of Global Warming (New York: New York University Press). Cuaresma, J. (2010). “Natural Disasters and Human Capital Accumulation,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 24, pp 280–302. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 25 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Dell, M., B. Jones, and B. Olken (2012).

“Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 4, pp. 66–95. De Winne, J., and G. Peersman (2021). “The Adverse Consequences of Global Harvest and Weather Disruptions on Economic Activity,” Nature Climate Change, Vol. 11, pp. 665–672. Di Giovanni, J., S. Kalemli-Özcan, A. Silva, and M. Yildirim (2022). “Global Supply Chain Pressures, International Trade, and Inflation,” NBER Working Paper No.

30240 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research). Finck, D., and P. Tillmann (2022). “The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Supply Chain Disruptions,” IMFS Working Paper No. 178 (Frankfurt: Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability). Gallup, J., J. Sachs, and A. Mellinger (1999). “Geography and Economic Development,” International Regional Science Review, Vol. 22, pp. 179–232. Gassebner, M., A. Keck, and R. The (2006).

“Shaken, Not Stirred: The Impact of Disasters on International Trade,” Review of International Economics, Vol. 18, pp. 351–368. Di Giovanni, J., Kalemli-Özcan, Ṣ., Silva, A., and Yildirim, M. A. (2022). “Global supply chain pressures, international trade, and inflation” (No. w30240). National Bureau of Economic Research. Ha, J., A. Kose, and F. Ohnsorge (2023). “One-Stop Source: A Global Database of Inflation,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 137, 102896.

Heinen, A., J. Khadan, and E. Strobl (2019). “The Price Impact of Extreme Weather in Developing Countries,” Economic Journal, Vol. 129, pp 1327–1342. International Monetary Fund (2020). “Physical Risk and Equity Prices,” Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 5 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007). Fourth Assessment Report, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (New York: Cambridge University Press).

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014). Climate Change in 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Working Group III Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (New York: Cambridge University Press). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2021). Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.

Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J. B. R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou (eds.)]. (New York: Cambridge University Press). In Press. Jordà, Ò. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections."

American Economic Review, Vol. 95, pp. 161–182. Kabaca, S., and K. Tuzcuoglu (2023). “Supply Drivers of US Inflation Since the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2023-19 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada). Kahn, M., K. Mohaddes, R. Ng, M. Pesaran, M. Raissi, and J-C. Yang (2021). “Long-Term Macroeconomic Effects of Climate Change: A Cross-Country Analysis,” Energy Economics, 105624. Kabundi, A., M. Mlachila, and J. Yao, 2022, “How Persistent Are Climate-Related Price Shocks?

Implications for Monetary Policy,” IMF Working Paper No. 22/207 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund). Kim, H., C. Matthes, and T. Phan, 2022, “Severe Weather and the Macroeconomy,” Working Paper Series No. 21-14R (Richmond, VA: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond). Loayza, N., E. Olaberria, J. Rogolini, and L. Christaensen (2012). “Natural Disasters and Growth: Going Beyond the Averages,” World Development, Vol. 40, pp. 1317–1336. Lucidi, F., S., M., M., Pisa and M. Tancioni (2022).

“The Effects of Temperature Shocks on Energy Prices and Inflation in the Euro Area.” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4109417 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4109417 INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 26 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Lund, S., J. Manyika, J. Woetzel, E. Barriball, and M. Krishnan (2020).

“Risk, Resilience, and Rebalancing in Global Value Chains,” MGI Report (Washington, DC: McKinsey Global Institute). Lütkepohl, H. (2005). New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis (Heidelberg: Springer Berlin). Nordhaus, W. (1991) “To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect,” Economic Journal, Vol. 101, pp. 920–937. Nordhaus, W. (1992). “An Optimal Transition Path for Controlling Greenhouse Gases,” Science, Vol. 258, pp. 1315–1319. Nordhaus, W. (2006).

“Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and New Findings,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 3510–3517. Noy, I. (2009). “The Macroeconomic Consequences of Disasters,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 221–231. Painter, M. (2020). “An Inconvenient Cost: The Effects of Climate Change on Municipal Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 135, pp. 468–482. Parker, M. (2018).

“The Impact of Disasters on Inflation,” Economics of Disasters and Climate Change, Vol. 2, pp. 21–48. Raddatz, C. (2009). “The Wrath of God: Macroeconomic Costs of Natural Disasters,” Policy Research Working Paper No. 5039 (Washington, DC: World Bank). Santacreu, A., and J. LaBelle (2022). “Global Supply Chain Disruptions and Inflation During the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, Vol. 104, pp. 78–91. Skidmore, M., and H. Toya (2002).

“Do Natural Disasters Promote Long-Run Growth?” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 40, pp. 664–687. Somanathan, E., R. Somanathan, A. Sudarshan, and M. Tewari (2021). “The Impact of Temperature on Productivity and Labor Supply: Evidence from Indian Manufacturing,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 129, pp. 1797–1827. Stern, N. (2007). The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund.

Not for Redistribution 27 IMF WORKING PAPERS This Is Going to Hurt: Climate Change, Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation Appendix Table A1.

Unit Root Test China EA Japan Korea UK US C C+T C C+T C C+T C C+T C C+T C C+T Temperature 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** SCPI 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00*** Headline CPI 0.00*** 0.09* 0.00*** 0.36 0.00*** 0.00*** 0.01*** 0.02** 0.01*** 0.53 0.00*** 0.00*** Core CPI 0.00*** 0.27 0.01*** 0.68 0.00*** 0.09* 0.07* 0.22 0.06* 0.37 0.01*** 0.49 Note: Augmented Dickey-Fuller unit root test is employed.

C and T indicate constant and trend, respectively. P-values are reported. ***, **, and * denote 1%, 5% and 10% significance levels, respectively. Lag 1 is used. We have used lag 2 and the results are broadly similar. We have employed the Phillips-Perron unit root test to test the robustness of the non-significant CPI series, and headline and core CPI with constant and trend are stationary in China.

Given the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of CPI series, which reduces outliers and volatility, we consider the CPI series stationary in our study. Appendix Figure A1. Supply Chain Pressures and Inflation: Korea Note: The figure presents the cumulative response of core inflation to supply chain pressures in dark blue line and 68 percent confidence intervals in light blue. The Asian financial crisis (1997-1999) and the COVID-19 pandemic (2020-2021) periods are eliminated.

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ©International Monetary Fund. Not for Redistribution 28

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281279488 Impacts of extreme weather in supply chains Article in Időjárás · July 2014 CITATIONS READS 8 3,353 2 authors, including: Beáta Pató Eötvös Loránd University 33 PUBLICATIONS 213 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Beáta Pató on 27 August 2015. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

IDŐJÁRÁS Quarterly Journal of the Hungarian Meteorological Service Vol. 118, No. 3, July – September, 2014, pp. 283–291 Impacts of extreme weather in supply chains Zoltán Kovács and Beáta Sz. G. Pató* University of Pannonia, Department of Supply Chain Management Veszprém, Egyetem u. 10, H-8200, Hungary *Corresponding author E-mail: patog@vnet.hu (Manuscript received in final form March 10, 2014) Abstract—There are many phenomena which confirm the fact of climate change.

Two kinds of responses are mentioned often to this fact: 1. Actions by which this process can be interrupted or slowed down. 2. Accepting the fact of changes and finding adaptive strategies. Authors present a research which aimed to increase the responsiveness of supply chains for the climate change – especially extreme weather. Secondary and primary investigation were carried out, and the nominal group technique was used to discover, group and assess the potential threats.

Results so far pointed out that both physical and control processes are involved in extreme whether consequences. Findings give good bases for a substantial risk analysis for any disaster coming from the climate change or other reasons. The research is supported by the Government of Hungary. Key-words: Climate change, disaster management in supply chains, extreme weather. 1. Introduction Extreme weather event might cause wide range of problems in everyday life.

While there is a debate on the fact of climate change (Nordhaus, 2013) and its possible source, there is no doubt that being ready for unexpected weather evens is not a bad decision. There are studies which deal with the source and implications of extreme weather. Stott et al. (2004), in their pioneering study, concluded that human influence more than doubled the likelihood of the heat wave occurring.

An 283 OECD study (Agrawala et al., 2011) discovered that while companies are generally aware of the physical implications of climate change, few include it into their risk management system. From this point of view, there are two possible strategies: 1. To reduce the climate change effects – mostly emission – in order to slow down or to turn back the negative trend. We have to be aware that outcomes of corrective and preventive actions will show up in middle or long time horizon. 2.

To learn to live with climate change at least on middle range and to do our best to adapt to the situation. Weather sensitive sectors such as agriculture, horticulture, food industries are involved mostly. Thorpe and Fennel (2012) present three case studies from coffee, cotton, and sesame oil business. Since supply is vital in wide area of society and life, it is important to examine the implications of climate change. The effects can have influence in direct and indirect ways.

Present youngsters are the most involved in the consequences of climate change.

In the State of the Union speech, President Obama urged Congress “to get together, pursue a bipartisan, market-based solution to climate change, like the one John McCain and Joe Lieberman worked on together a few years ago.” In his second inauguration speech (January, 2013), the president said: “We will respond to the threat of climate change, knowing that failure to do so would betray our children and future generations.

Some may still deny the overwhelming judgment of science, but none can avoid the devastating impact of raging fires, and crippling drought, and more powerful storms.” The topic is especially relevant in Hungary, since we faced some extreme weather events recently, such as extreme temperature, excessive rainfall, flooding, and spring snowstorms.

Recognizing this and the fact that certain aspects of climate change issues are inevitable, University of Pannonia defined a project to carry out research on consequences of climate change, especially weather phenomena issues. Economics, agriculture, engineering, and social science researchers work in the project supported by the EU and the Hungarian government. Inside economics, the main analyzed areas are: macroeconomics, regional development, tourism, health sector, and supply chains.

Part of the research is a literature review, such as we introduced above. The other part is primary research, in first stage mostly forecast. First we tried to discover a wide set of implications. The method we have used is the nominal group technique. In our research we asked master level students – who are in supply chain related programs – about their judgments on the possible consequences of climate change, especially extreme weather. 284 2.

Literature review The main research question was to learn the opinion of next generation about weather change implications in supply chains. According to International Energy Agency (2013), it is possible that global warming will be more than two degrees Celsius. Above this limit the climate could become unstable. This will affect production and transport processes as well. Carey (2011) suggests that extreme weather events have become more common in recent years. Czifra, et al.

(2013) argue that climate change affects competitiveness. According to IPCC’s annual report (Trenberth, 1999), Hungary is acutely vulnerable. Based on this forecast climate change will turn the weather towards extreme events. The temperature will be higher than it is now, and we can expect stormy winters with more fall (Czifra, et al., 2013). In Hungary one of the main supply related implications will be the deterioration of transport infrastructure.

Extreme weather phenomena such as storm, flooding, high temperature, lots of fall will cause damages in transport infrastructure. Hunyadi (2010) gives examples for possible damages of road infrastructure. Gáspár (2003, 2004) has set up road durability requirements. He suggests that the requirement pyramid (Fig. 1) will change in the future as a respond to climate change.

Users’ needs Safety, convenience, travel time, accessibility Functional requirements Constructional requirements Material property Raw material property requirements Roughness, noise reduction, traffic lanes Strength, durability, etc. Fatigue strength, deformation, cracks, thickness Composition, particle distribution, voids content, density, brevity, penetration, etc. Fig. 1.

Surface performance requirement related pyramid of requirements (Gáspár, 2003) 285 Hunyadi (2010) argues planting vegetation near the roads which have larger tolerance limits, in order to take consideration the effects of climate change in advance. Gáspár (2003) suggests life cycle design:”life cycle design includes both design methods and their phases which take into consideration economic issues, cultural integration and ecological aspects”.

In addition to the environmental impacts on supply chains, there is an other important factor: restructuring of customer needs. Production infrastructure and distribution networks have to adjust to them (Czifra et al, 2013). Caldwell et al. (2013) and others (Thrope and Fennel, 2012) examined the potential impacts of climate change to freight transport. Table 1 summarizes the direct and indirect effects of meteorological factors on terrestial traffic safety. Jüttner et al.

(2003) give an overview of the potential research areas. Table 1.

Effects of weather on surface traffic safety (Vissy and Bátyi, 1998) Direct effects Surface conditions (road, rail) Visibility Loading Snowing Fog Wind Snowdrift Heavy rainfall Heavy rainfall Indirect effects Biometeorological effects (front effects) Accident prevention Health and safety Temperature There are relatively small number of researches on the opinion of the future generation, however, Revesz and Shahabian (2010) evaluate opportunities for intergenerational discounting, which are often conflated in the literature.

They have found that the existing justifications do not support the prevalent approach of discounting benefits to future generations at the rate of return in financial markets and, more generally, that discounting cannot substitute for a moral theory setting forth our obligations to future generations. 3. Research methodology and results As previous studies from literature show, implications of climate changes include wide areas of supply chains.

We can say that the whole society is involved in the climate change, partly due to the effects in supply chains. There are different ways to discover opinions on the topic. Zaltman et al. (1982) and Yin (1994) used discovery oriented, practitionerbased approach, with semi-structured interviews. 286 The nominal group technique (NGT) is a group-based problem solving or decision making method (Delbecq and VandeVen, 1971, 1975; VandeVen and Delbecq, 1974).

It combines the amenities of the un/low structured brainstorming and formal voting. We have followed the next steps: 1. Introduction and explanation: We welcomed the participants, who were master students in logistics, management, MBA and industrial engineering. We provided the question in written form on the top of an A4 format page: What are the impacts of extreme weather to the operation of supply chains? We have raised participants’ attention to the importance of the question. 2.

Silent generation of ideas: We asked participants to put down possible answers to the paper. Since any interaction is prohibited, in this phase we asked them not to consult or discuss their ideas with others. This stage lasted 10 minutes. In this stage, we repressed not only negative but useful positive interactions also. We allowed them in next steps. 3. Sharing ideas: We invited participants to read their ideas they have written on the paper. If they ran out of idea, they could ‘pass’.

If they have new idea – generated by others – they can join again. They can further develop others’ ideas. We recorded each idea into a spreadsheet using the same words as participants formulated their ideas. (They were asked to use not more than 3 words to compose their idea.) The round robin process continued until all ideas have been presented. Since this phase supports only positive interaction, they could hear each other but were not allowed to comment others’ ideas. 4.

Discussion: Participants were invited to seek verbal explanation or further details about any of the ideas that others have produced that may not be clear to them. Anybody could ask, comment, interpret, explain any ideas on the screen. New ideas were generated, others were combined, extended or deleted (when they are proved to be equal with others: they called duplicates).

There are two dangers in this stage (based on our more than 30 years NGT experiences): ― Drawing together ideas might result so-called ‘super idea’ which will get lots of votes but is not concrete at all, thus, it can not be made real. Sometimes ‘super idea’ and some of its parts exist simultaneously. ― There will be similar good ideas, which will compete again each other and share votes. In this way, each of them gets little weight and will drop out.

It is important for the facilitator to keep good balance in the weight of ideas. Such aspects are complexity, extent, related hierarchy level of ideas. In this stage, we have received the list of possible effects in Table 2. 287 Table 2.

List of potential effects after group discussion 1 Product damage 36 Earthquake abyss engulfes the company 2 Communication problems in the EDI 37 Daily 8-hour work period may be fragmented Increasing number of non-forecasted 38 transport errors 39 Closer relocation of supply chain players 40 Introduction of stricter limitations 41 Establishing specialized warehouses 42 Conflicts between partners 43 Consumer needs can not be satisfied 44 Material flow slows More dense distribution points, necessity for 45 warehouses 46 Shutdown due to state of emergency 47 Appreciation of taking out insurance 48 Good condition tires can not be calculated 49 Market rankings change 50 Development of vehicles 3 Damage of factories 4 Routes are cancelled 5 Extreme work conditions 6 Other modal transport are forced 7 Cost, time, and resource losses 8 Low water-sailing ban Increased preparations in the case of FMCG 9 products 10 Huge storm - closed airports 11 Increased transport ( supply) uncertainty 12 Additional storage costs Appreciation of reliability models due to 13 increased uncertainty 14 Increased number of risk factors Increased costs of mining, excavating raw 15 materials 16 Increased transport time requirement 51 Needs assessment difficulties 52 IT equipment damage 53 Stress 17 Companies that fall out of the supply chains 54 Longer delivery lead times 18 Electric grid dropouts complicate storing 55 Shipments over Arctic can not be solved 19 Necessity of work reorganization Increased mental and physical load of 20 labour Higher vulnerability of electronic products, 21 lower humidity during winter 22 Loss of goodwill due to delays and damages 56 Decentralized inventory management 23 Lack of agricultural products 61 Growing importance of forecasts 24 Physical delivery becomes impossible 62 Obstruction in mining 25 Difficult traffic conditions due to flooding 63 Rails freezing 26 Development of resistant packaging 64 Shifted seasonality Appreciation of products with longer 65 warranty period 66 Chain problems accumulate Increasing weight of security/safety 67 technology 68 Need for special storage conditions 69 Changes in priorities within the company 70 Co-operation with the army Importance of loading and fastening 71 technology 72 Rail deformation 27 Railway comes to the fore 28 Coming out supply chain issues 29 Profile change is necessary (products) 30 Maintaining higher inventory 31 Accidents 32 Maintaining crisis staff 33 Alternative supply seeking 34 Further company social responsibilities 35 More pressure on co-operation, collaboration 288 57 Necessity of rationalization 58 Increased energy consumption 59 Appreciation of meteorological information 60 Weakening of political stability 5.

Ranking: In this session there were little, spontaneous and informal interaction between participants. They were busy with their voting papers and selecting the most preferred ideas. First they were asked to select the 5 most important effects from the list of 72. Then they ranked them. The ranking order was: 1 – 5 – 2 – 4 – 3 where 5 was the grade of the most important, 1 is the grade of least important one. Finally, the grade points were summarized for all effects in the list of 72 ideas.

Table 3 shows the final ranks of the effects. Then we summarized the grade points. Table 3. The final ranks Rank Potential effects Score 1. Increased transport ( supply) uncertainty 22 2. Cost, time and resource losses 21 3. Routes are cancelled 15 4. Damage of factories 12 5. Accidents 11 6-7. Appreciation of reliability models due to increased uncertainty 10 6-7. Maintaining crisis staff 10 4.

Conclusions Looking at the list we can conclude, that students have a realistic judgment on possible consequences of climate change, especially effects of extreme weather. It is especially important in Hungary where the frequency of extreme weather events is increasing, however, to put it cynically, they are tending to become not extreme ones. We did not asked the participants about the ‘to do’s, it will be the part of further research.

Based on their case studies Thorpe and Fennel (2012), using an EOCD study, suggest five possible actions: 1. Raise awareness and understanding of adaptation within the business: companies need to make more effort to understand and evaluate the potential physical impacts. 2. Ask producers about current climate trends and impacts: talking to producers directly, risks must be assessed. 3.

Build longer-term and more stable relationships with suppliers: where markets are more stable, producers are empowered to invest for the future. 289 4. Support community development and environmental sustainability: climate resilient products, technologies, new forms of organizations and cooperations, managing social issues, new markets need to be supported. 5. Work through existing institutions, including governments.

Our other researches on modeling the implications (Kovács et al., 2014) confirm this complex approach. We are planning to get further information from the national disaster management system. This research will include the evaluation of extreme weather related cases such as snowstorm and flooding. Acknowledgment–This paper presents the results of the projects TÁMOP-4.2.2/A-11/1-20120064.This project is supported by the European Union and co-financed by the European Social Fund.

References Agrawala, S., Carraro, M., Kingsmill, N., Lanzi, E., Mullan, M., and Prudent-Richard, G. 2011: Private Sector Engagement in Adaptation to Climate Change: Approaches to Managing Climate Risks. OECD Environment Working Papers 39, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kg221jkf1g7-en. Caldwell, H., Quinn, H.K., Menuier, J., Subrier, J., and Grenzeback, L., 2013: Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Freight Transport. http://climate.dot.gov/documents/workshop1002 /caldwell.pdf.

Carey, J., 2011: Storm warnings: extreme weather is a product of climate change. Scientific American. http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/extreme-weather-caused-by-climate-change/ Czifra, T., Dobozi, E., Selmeczi, P., Kohán, Z., Rideg, A., and Schneller, K., 2013: A területfejlesztés 4 éves szakmai programja a klímaváltozás hatásainak mérséklésére (2010–2013). http://www.vati.hu/files/sharedUploads/docs/ttei/A_teruletfejlesztes_klimaprogramja_20102013_1.pdf. In Hungarian) Delbecq, A.L. and.

VandeVen, A.H., 1971: A Group Process Model for Problem Identification and Program Planning. J. Appl. Behav. Sci. VII (July/August, 1971), 466–491. Delbecq, A.L., VandeVen, A.H., and Gustafson, D.H., 1975: Group Techniques for Program Planners. Glenview, Illinois: Scott Foresman and Company. Gáspár, L., 2003: Az élettartam mérnöki tudomány. Közlekedéstudomány 53, 81–129. (In Hungarian) Gáspár, L., 2004: Az útburkolatok teljesítőképessége, Közúti mélyépítési szemle 54 (11), 7–12.

(In Hungarian) Hunyadi, D., 2010: A klímaváltozás hatása a közlekedési infrastruktúrára. Közúti mélyépítési szemle 60 (3), 35–40. (In Hungarian) International Energy Agency, 2013: Redrawing the Energy Climate MapWorld Energy Outlook Special Report - released on 10 June 2013. Jüttner, U., Peck, H. and Christopher, M., 2003: Supply chain risk management: outlining an agenda for future research. Int. J. Logistics: Res. Appl. 6, 197–210.

Kovács Z., Pató Gáborné Szűcs B., and Szabó L., 2014: Logisztika a klímaváltozás körülményei között. Logisztikai Híradó. 2014/1, 39–42. (In Hungarian) Nordhaus, W.D., 2013: Why the Global Warming Skeptics Are Wrong? http://www.nybooks.com/ articles/archives/2012/mar/22/why-global-warming-skeptics-are-wrong/?pagination=false. Revesz, L.R. and Shahabian, M.R., 2010: Climate Change and Future Generations. Southern California Law Review 84, 1099–1164.

290 Stott, P.A., Stone, D.A., and Allen, M.R., 2004: Human contribution to the European heatwave of 2003. Nature 432, 610–614. Thorpe, J. and Fennel, S., 2012: Climate Change Risks and Supply Chain Responsibility: How should companies respond when extreme weather affects small-scale producers in their supply chain?” Oxfam Discussion Papers, June 2012., www.oxfam.org. Trenberth, K. E. 1999: Short-term Climate Variations. Recent accomplishments and issues for future progress.

(Eds: R. Pielke Sr and R. Pielke Jr) Storms Vol 1. Routledge Press. London. 126–141. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 2011: Assuring Food Security in Developing Countries under the Challenges of Climate Change: Key Trade and Development Issues of a Fundamental Transformation of Agriculture. Discussion Paper 2011(2). VandeVen, A.H. and Delbecq, A.L., 1974: The effectiveness of nominal, Delphi, and interacting group decision making processes. Acad. Manage J. 605–621.

Vissy, K. and Bátyi, F., 1998: A földfelszíni közlekedés meteorológiája. Természet Világa, 129. I. különszám, 75–78. (In Hungarian) Yin, R. 1994: Case study research: design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage. Zaltman, G., Lemasters, K., and Heffring, K. 1982: Theory construction in marketing: some thoughts on thinking. New York, Wiley. 291 View publication stats

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380746388 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains Article in Afet ve Risk Dergisi · May 2024 DOI: 10.35341/afet.1361151 CITATIONS READS 0 968 1 author: Veli Ahmet Cevik Hitit University 19 PUBLICATIONS 20 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Veli Ahmet Cevik on 01 August 2024. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Research Article Journal of Disaster and Risk 7(2), 2024, (368-391) Received: 15.09.2023 Accepted: 19.05.2024 Published: 31.07.2024 e-ISSN: 2636-8390 DOI: 10.35341/afet.1361151 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains Veli Ahmet Çevik1 Abstract While the global public is struggling with Covid-19 and the subsequent inflation, war and energy crisis, climate change has turned into a forgotten crisis.

However, with the increasing number of disasters caused by extreme weather events in different continents of the world, climate change has started to attract attention all over the world. Extreme weather events such as global warming, floods and hurricanes, which are the result of global climate change, not only affect the lives of societies, but also affect logistics and supply chains.

The first spots to see the effects of extreme weather conditions as a result of climate change are the production centers in different parts of the world and the international logistics sector, which ensures that the goods produced in these facilities reach the markets. By this study, the qualitative effects of climate change on supply chains were investigated and this research is expected to shed light on the effects of climate change on international logistics activities.

Keywords: Climate Change, Global Warming, Logistics, Supply Chain 1. INTRODUCTION Climate change, which is felt more and more each year, has been overshadowed by the coronavirus pandemic, which emerged in China in the last days of 2019 and damaged the global economy much more severely than the global financial crisis that broke out in 2008 (Gopinath, 2020; URL 1).

While the governments were struggling with the global health crisis, which was caught unprepared, global warming turned into a forgotten crisis. However, towards the end of 2021, with the decrease of the effects of the global pandemic, the issue of climate change has started to attract attention again.

In a study conducted in Germany in which respondents were asked to select the two most important issues among the twelve issues facing the country, from social policy to the economy, climate change was at the top of the list by 43% of the respondents, followed by coronavirus with 38% (URL 2). The effects of the pandemic have eased, but this time, climate change continues to be overshadowed due to global inflation, war and energy crisis.

Undoubtedly, the increase in air temperatures in recent years has a large share in the increasing interest of societies against climate change. Because the last eight years have been the warmest years since the 1800s, when global temperature records were started to be kept, and even 2021 has been recorded as the fifth warmest year (URL 3).

Bigger, more complex and more uncertain than other environmental problems, climate change is affecting agriculture, energy use, health and many aspects of nature, which means it affects everything and everyone. The causes and consequences of climate change are very diverse (Tol, 1 Lecturer, Dr., Hitit Uni., Osmancık Ömer Derindere Vocational School, Depart.

of Management and Organization, Logistics Prog, Çorum E-mail: veliahmetcevik@hitit.edu.tr ORCID No: 0000-0003-1981-7275 To cite this article Çevik, V. A. (2024). Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains. Journal of Disaster and Risk, 7(2), 368-391. 368 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik 2009).

Rising temperatures, persistent multi-year and severe droughts, storms, rising sea levels, melting glaciers and warming oceans in connection with climate change affect human activities and bottleneck global supply chains, which is the focus of this study. The globalized production system, characterized by low transportation costs, economies of scale and comparative advantages, has increased the links between producers and consumers all over the world (Andreoni and Miola, 2015).

Floods, hurricanes, high temperatures and forest fires that have emerged in different parts of the world in recent years affect one link of global supply chains, and this effect carries the risk of spreading to the entire network. Supply chains have a vital role in the development of global economies.

Evaluating the economic consequences of disruptions in the regular flow of goods and services of global climate change is becoming more and more important for macroeconomic analyzes and economic policies. In this context, various central banks have begun to assess the consequences of climate change on the conduct of monetary policy, recognizing that supply shocks related to, for example, extreme weather events can strike a balance between stable inflation or output (Cœuré, 2018).

On the other hand, activities such as production, transportation, storage and distribution carried out in supply chains have serious effects on climate change. The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Chapter 3, climate change is examined in general terms. In Chapter 4, the effects of climate change on the supply chains and the effects on the main activity areas of the supply chain are investigated.

The study was based on existing secondary sources, including books, regional and international reports, scientific journals, news articles and internet resources highlighting climate change-related supply chain issues, and expert interview. In this study, the qualitative effects of climate change on supply chains were investigated and this research is expected to shed light on the effects of climate in international logistics activities. 2.

LITERATURE REVIEW Climate change has been a recognized issue throughout history, but as a science, theory and evidence have been studied for the last two centuries. In the 1820s, French physicist and mathematician Joseph Fourier, realizing that the atmosphere traps heat, studied the heat balance equations for the Earth. He concluded that the planet was about 30°C hotter than these equations suggest, arguing that something was blocking the energy output (Stern, 2015).

In recent years, climate change has become one of the most important challenges at practically all levels of decision-making, both governmental and private. Climate change, which is a result of global warming, is a universal reality that affects the life of human societies, business activities and the environment itself in many ways (Stern et al., 2010).

The mid-1990s work of William Nordhaus on an integrated quantitative assessment model to explain the relationship between the economy and climate earned him the 2018 Nobel Prize in Economics (URL 4). Academic studies in the context of supply chains and climate change have been evaluated from many different perspectives. These studies can be divided into two groups as the effects of supply chain activities on climate change and the effects of climate change on supply chain activities.

In the context of the effects of supply chain activities on climate change, Solaymani (2019) examined the CO2 emission models and the transportation sector in the seven economies that emit the most carbon in his study. Zhang et al. (2018) investigated the analysis of an optimal mass transit structure under carbon emission constraint on a case in China.

Wan and his team (2018) 369 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains presented solutions and policy recommendations regarding the decarbonization of the international shipping industry. The effects of climate change, which is also the subject of this research, on supply chain activities have started to attract the attention of researchers in recent years. In a systematic literature review on the management of climate change risks in global supply chains by Ghadge et al.

(2020), 90 interdisciplinary articles were reviewed between 2005 and 2018. It is seen that more than 30% of these studies were carried out between 2015 and 2018. A large number of studies have been carried out on food supply chains, which are among the areas where the effects of climate change are seen most rapidly. Godde et al.

(2021) studied the effects of climate change on animal based food supply chains and emphasized that climate change will have effects throughout the supply chain, from agricultural production to storage, transportation and human consumption. Parajuli et al. (2019), in face of climate change investigated how fruit and vegetable production supply chains could remain environmentally sustainable.

In order to reduce possible losses in the processing chain due to extreme and variable weather conditions, they suggested increasing the capacity of processing facilities such as storage, transportation and logistics in the supply chain.

Pankratz and Schiller (2021) investigated climate change and adaptation in global supply chain networks and suggested that extreme weather events in the regions where suppliers are located lead to a decrease in the operating performance of suppliers and their customers.

Izaguirre and her colleagues (2021), in their study investigating climate change risk to global port operations, revealed coastal flooding and overflows caused by sea level rise and heat stress effects of high temperatures as the main factors affecting port operations. In their research Becker et al.

(2018), examining the effects of climate change on maritime, they recommended that a wide range of stakeholders operating in ports and related supply chains be in communication regarding adaptation to climate change. In their literature review research Ryley et al.

(2020), examining the effects of climate change on aviation, they emphasized the importance of the participation of more stakeholders operating in the aviation industry in the development and implementation of adaptation plans against climate change risks. Their research on adapting railway maintenance to climate change, Garmabaki et al. (2021) concluded that it is important to implement effective climate adaptation approaches, including awareness.

In the context of the effects of climate change, although industries such as supply chains, maritime and ports, aviation and railway are examined separately, the effects of climate change on all modes of transport are clearly lacking as a whole and there is an obvious need for a general framework. To address this research gap, supply chain and logistics operations are considered as a whole in this study. 3. CLIMATE CHANGE Natural disasters have occurred throughout history.

However, it is now becoming more frequent, more intense, and more importantly, more predictable. Climate change refers to long-term changes in the Earth's local, regional and global temperatures and weather patterns.

Global warming, which is used in the same sense as climate change, but is one of the consequences of climate change, is caused by the use of fossil fuels, which increase the levels of greenhouse gases that trap heat in the atmosphere and increase the average surface 370 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik temperature of the Earth as a result of human activities.

These temperature increases, directly or indirectly caused by humans, are generally called global warming (URL 5, URL 6.) Especially in the 20th century, the rapid increase in industrialization and the ability to travel around the world with unprecedented efficiency, the ability to trade commodities and share information have accelerated global warming. According to estimates, about 90% of world trade is transported by ships.

In 2019, 11 billion tons of goods were loaded at world ports and the global trade value of goods exported to the whole world was approximately 19 trillion US dollars (URL 7). Humanity has depended more and more on fossil fuels since the Industrial Revolution 200 years ago. Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels have increased steadily since then, accumulating in the Atmosphere, warming the planet, and net emissions have increased by 40% over the past 30 years (URL 8).

Although the subject of this study is the impact of climate change on supply chains, the global greenhouse gas emissions caused by the sectors are shown in Figure 1.

Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Economic Sectors Other Energy 10% Industry 24% Electricity and Heat Production 23% Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Use 22% Transportation 15% Buildings 6% Figure 1.Greenhouse Gas Emissions by Economic Sectors ( URL 9) Climate change makes itself felt with different dangers and these dangers affect businesses in different parts of the world in very different ways (Table 1). The potential threats of climate change are given in Table 1.

Many of these threats continue to threaten societies and businesses in different geographies. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) with the goal of providing scientific data to all levels of government for the development of climate policies.

With the founding of the IPCC, the process of developing global action to manage climate change began more than three decades ago. The IPCC was created to offer a concise scientific 371 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains summary of what is currently known about climate change. It has produced six main evaluation reports in 1990, 1995, 2001, 2007, 2014 and 2022. Table 1.

Operations Risk Indicators (Mazzacurati et al., 2017) Climate Hazard Description Heat Stress Increase in temperature Water Stress Extreme Precipitation Wildfire Sea level rise Cyclones, Hurricanes, Typhoons Socio-economic vulnerability Potential Business Impacts  Rising costs of energy for cooling  Heightened risk of brownouts/power outages  Decreased labor productivity  Negative impacts on human health/ labor force Fluctuation in water supply and demand  Reduced supply/ Increased costs  Interrupted business  Damaged reputation  Losted jobs & customers  Impairment of Property and Infrastructure  Compromised infrastructure Events of heavy rain  Delayed projects  Disrupted operations  Constant decline in property value Change in fire conditions  Increased insurance losses  Flooding problems and damaged physical Elevated storm surge, assets intensified by the escalation  Permanent loss of property value of sea levels.

 Costs of moving operations  Severe property damage Exposure extreme weather  Constant decline in property value phenomenon  Costs of moving operations  Losses in value added operations Social upheaval, population  Disruptions in operations, physical assets movement or economic damages disruption exacerbated or  Impact on on the labor force intensified by the influences  Social acceptance to operate of climate change The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was created at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992 to coordinate action on climate change.

UNFCCC parties have met annually at Conferences of the Parties (COPs) since 1995. COP 1 was held in Berlin, with an agreement on "Jointly Implemented Actions", the first joint measures in international climate action (Breidenich et al., 1998). The third COP was held in 1997 in Kyoto and the Kyoto Protocol, which entered into force in 2005, was adopted. The Paris Climate Agreement was signed at COP 21 held in Paris in 2015.

The COP26 UN Climate Change Conference, which was planned to be held in Glasgow in 2020 by the UK in partnership with Italy, was postponed due to Covid-19 and held in 2021. The COP27 took place in 2022 in Egypt and The COP28 held in Dubai, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in 2023. The COP29 is scheduled in Bakü, Azerbaijan in November 2024. 372 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik 4. IMPACT ON SUPPLY CHAIN Lambert et al.

(1998) defined the concept of supply chain, which has many different definitions in the literature, as the harmony of companies that bring products or services to the market. Supply chain management, on the other hand, is the coordination of activities within and between vertically linked firms in order to profitably serve their end customers (Larson and Rogers, 1998).

According to The Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals (CSCMP), ‘‘Supply chain management encompasses the planning and management of all activities involved in sourcing and procurement, conversion, and all logistics management activities’’ (URL 10).

As can be understood from the definitions above, the activities of processing raw materials in any corner of the world in different geographies and serving them to consumers in many different places constitute the subject of the supply chain.

With the decrease in transportation costs for the last 50 years, developments in communication technologies and the spread of just-in-time production philosophy, outsourcing has increased and production can be made in geographies that are far from the markets. Such a level of complexity and interconnectedness of supply chains reduced costs considerably when things were on track, but in the case of a risk, this supply network can pose great challenges to businesses.

The most severe of these difficulties was witnessed by the whole world in the Covid 19 pandemic. In addition to the pandemic, the gigantic container ship agrounded in the Suez Canal almost brought Asia-Europe trade to a halt. The supply chain does not only cover production and supply activities, but also includes other activities such as transportation, warehousing and retail, as understood from the above definitions.

These core activities cover other components such as people, technology, knowledge transfer and adding value. Exposure of the activities and components of a supply chain to one of the climate change factors at any point in the world can bring the entire operation in the chain to a halt. In fact, nature's disruption of supply chains is not a new phenomenon. Dealing with extreme weather events such as floods, droughts and storms began long before corporations became popular in the 19th century.

For many firms, the physical impact of climate change will affect them more through disaster-affected suppliers or flooded transportation routes, rather than their own operations (URL 11). The Western Pacific is home to a significant portion of semiconductor supply chains, with the probability of devastating hurricanes occurring once in 100 years likely to double or even quadruple by 2040.

Such hurricanes have the potential to wipe out about 30% of their income by causing months of production loss for businesses in the geography where they occur. Heavy rare earth mining in Southeast China is also likely to face major challenges with the increased probability of heavy rainfall (URL 12). The increasing effects of climate change have led governments, businesses and other stakeholders to take steps towards climate change.

Established at Stanford University in 2022, the School of Sustainability will focus on a range of disciplines, from research to new technologies and climate policy study (URL 13). On the other hand, in an open letter ahead of the G7 summit in Germany in 2022, more than ten global big company executives called for ambitious government climate policies that offer clarity and stability to the private sector (URL 14).

These developments are examples of the steps taken by different sectors towards climate change. Climate change factors such as the steps taken by governments and the changing purchasing behavior of consumers pose threats and opportunities to businesses and supply chain networks (Figure 2) (Dasaklis and Pappis, 2013). In a study conducted in 28 countries in 2019, 69% of the participants said that they made a change in consumer behavior due to climate change concerns (URL 15).

373 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains *Differentiated products and services *New markets *New technologies *Value Creation *Clean energy *Resource efficiency *Better company performance Climate Change Opportunities Information Cash Flow Supplier Manufacturer Distributor s Retailers Customer r Material Flow Reverse Material Flow Climate Change Threats GHG Emissions Carbon Management *International accords *Litigation risk *Shareholder’s value * Environmental sensitive of customers *Disruption *Physical impacts *Raw materials’ scarcity/shortage *Health, welfare, security threats *Vulnerable ecosystems Figure 2.

Climate Change Threats and Opportunities for Supply Chain Networks (Dasaklis and Pappis, 2013; URL 9, URL 16) 4.1. Production and Storage The factors required for production are labor, capital, land and entrepreneurship (Karagül, 2014). Climate change has the potential to affect all of these factors. If the living areas of the employees in the production centers are affected by natural disasters, it is inevitable that the businesses they work will also affect them.

On the other hand, societies had to migrate from their places of residence due to extreme weather conditions. Between 2008 and 2016, abrupt weather events like floods, storms, forest fires, and excessive temperatures resulted in the forcible displacement of 21.5 million people annually on average (URL 17).

International management consulting firm McKinsey has grouped the socioeconomic impact of climate change in a five-system framework: livability and workability, food systems, physical assets, infrastructure services and natural capital (URL 18). Of the hazards listed in Table 1, the temperature factor may affect people's ability to work outdoors.

Between 1992 and 2016, approximately 70,000 workers were seriously injured and more than 700 lost their lives due to extreme heat in the USA (Tanglis and Devine, 2018). Physical assets such as buildings that constitues production centers of enterprises can be damaged or destroyed by dangers such as excessive precipitation, floods and forest fires. In 2011, more than 270 factories were damaged in five industrial estates in the flood disaster that occurred in Thailand (URL 19).

Infrastructure services are also damaged due to extreme weather events. Other energy production and transmission tools, especially electricity and natural gas services, 374 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik suffer, too. According to the IPCC's 6th Assessment Report (URL 9), the hotter summer climate in Asian countries and the increasing population cause a rapid increase in the demand for energy for cooling (URL 20).

For example, the Japanese government, after warning in March 2022, called on businesses and people in the Tokyo area to cut electricity use with a second warning in June, as the heat wave increased the use of air conditioners. Climate change is changing ecosystems and destroying natural capitals such as forests and oceans that contribute significantly to societies. Because trees keep greenhouse gases out of the atmosphere, forests are critical to limiting the damage of climate change.

Agriculture, forestry and related sectors contribute 21% of global greenhouse gas emissions, of which 45% come from deforestation for economic activity (URL 20). Global Canopy, one of the non-profit environmental groups, analyzed the environmental programs of 350 companies working in the forestry, land use and agriculture sectors, which have a major impact on the world's forests, within the framework of the United Nations' Race to Zero 2030 breakthroughs.

It has been found that 148 of these companies have committed to net zero, but only nine have made strong progress in preventing deforestation (URL 21) In addition, leaders of Unilever and Nestlé companies in the global food industry have committed to achieving deforestation-free supply chains by the end of 2025 (URL 22).

In today's international trade, raw materials and intermediate products are brought together from different parts of the world with the philosophy of just-in-time manufacturing and presented to the end user. Certain products have clustered production centers in certain countries or even in different regions of these countries. Risks increase when suppliers are clustered in certain regions. About 70% of the world's smartphones are concentrated in one region of China.

Another region is home to half of global laptop production (URL 23). The world has witnessed this problem in the latest Covid-19 outbreak. It is estimated that at least 51,000 companies operating in different parts of the world have a first-tier supplier in the Wuhan region of China, where the pandemic first appeared, and at least five million companies around the world have at least one second-tier supplier (Çevik and Durukan, 2021).

Severe freeze in Texas in February 2021 caused the largest power outage in US history. These cuts have exacerbated the semiconductor shortage triggered by the global pandemic, and key suppliers of the automotive industry dependent on microchips have had to close their factories (URL 24). Sea level rise is one of the most important effects of climate change. Future rates of sea level rise have caught the world's attention.

Countries, particularly those in low-lying areas and small islands, are worried that flooding and coastal erosion would limit their land area, and at worst, a sizable portion of their population may be compelled to emigrate (Mimura, 2013). According to the United Nations report, approximately one in ten of the world's population lives in coastal areas less than 10 meters above sea level, and approximately 40% of the world's population lives in an area 100 km from the coast (URL 25).

Sea level rise is considered the most serious threat that climate change poses to China's coastal regions. Over the past century, China has experienced a sustained trend of sea level rise, with a total rise in sea levels of about 20-30 cm and an average annual rise of 2.5 mm (Cui et al., 2018). China's 11 coastal provinces occupy only 13.5% of the land area, accounting for 45.22% of the national GDP and more than 41% of the population by 2021 (URL 26).

Damage to structures, equipment, vehicles used for transportation, raw materials, components, and products, as well as decreased or suspended production, have an immediate impact on many 375 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains medium-sized businesses. The main reason for this is that the machines are permanently installed, which can hardly be protected if water enters the first floor. Therefore, production will be interrupted rapidly (Leitold et al., 2021).

The increase in production in the world and the growth in e-commerce have increased the number of warehouses and transfer centers. These centers, where raw materials, intermediate products and final products are stored, are generally large closed areas and characteristic structures that are not very high from the ground. These facilities are vulnerable to flooding and extreme weather events.

Electricity, natural gas and telecommunications infrastructures are the backbone of both generation and storage facilities. Recent studies show that when power outages are included, economic losses from flood-induced business disruption are 300% higher (Koks et al., 2019). Droughts in recent years have seriously damaged electricity production. Severe storms will damage fragile power grids and natural gas supply systems that is not designed to operate at certain temperatures.

Similarly, it will damage critical equipment in gas and coal power plants, wind turbines and pipelines, disrupting critical infrastructures of generation and storage systems. Extreme heat and drought as a result of climate change affect many different regions from the European continent to China.

According to the report of the European Union Joint Research Center, Europe is experiencing the driest time of 500 years in August 2022 and more than 60 percent of land in the EU is under drought warnings or alerts (URL 27). Drought seriously affects agriculture, energy and global material production. Cooling water is of vital importance for thermal power plants that provide about 80% of the world's electricity.

In the USA, it is estimated that 41% of the amount of fresh water used in power plants in 2005 was used for electricity generation, primarily for cooling (Zhou et al., 2018). China, which has been heading towards a water crisis in recent years, has 20% of the world's population but only 7% of the world's fresh water resources. The country, which is the production center of the world, is structurally insufficient in water resources and electrical power to sustain its economy (URL 28).

The longest river in Asia, the Yangtze, reached a record low, causing major companies such as Toyota and Foxconn to shut down factory operations for at least a week due to outages in hydroelectric power plants (URL 29). Considering the weight of the country in the global economy, potential waterrelated disruptions that started in China will shock the food, energy and material markets around the world and create economic and political turmoil in the coming years (URL 30).

High temperatures, which reduce productivity, tend to reduce both agriculture and manufacturing exports, and hurricanes, which reduce national incomes, tend to reduce imports. The spatial distribution of climatic conditions in extensive trade networks has the potential to have an impact on market pricing through both effects on supply costs and affects on demand (Carleton and Hsiang, 2016). 4.2.

Transportation Transport is an important sector that contributes to the smooth functioning of societies and ensures the economic development of a nation (Vajjarapu et al., 2019). The lockdown periods that started with the Covid 19 pandemic once again emphasized the great importance of the transportation industry.

The transportation sector, which is in a key position to ensure an uninterrupted flow of goods and the continuation of world trade, needs to be prepared in advance for the increasing effects of climate change day by day. Climate change impact types and possible consequences in terms of transportation are given in Table 2. 376 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik Table 2.

Types of Climate Change Impacts, Possible Consequences for Transport (Nemry and Demirel, 2012) Climate impact Increased Summer Temperatures Increased Winter Temperatures Increased Precipitation and floodings Increased and more frequent extreme winds Sea Level Rise and sea storm surges Change in frequency of Winter Storms Permafrost degradation abnd thawing Reduced Arctic sea ice Cover Earlier River Ice Breakup Overview of potential impact on transport system  Deterioration of asphalt, Railway Track Expansion, change in the takingoff distance and required airport runway length, lack of navigable water, thermal expansion of bridges, superheating of diesel engine  Alleviating limitations on road and rail maintenance  Modified construction seasons  Inundation of terrestrial transportation infrastructures, dampened road surfaces, and hazards to safety.

 Erosion of embankments, scouring of bridges, and submergence of subterranean transit systems.  Increased occurrence of slushflow avalanches, landslides, and related vulnerabilities.  Impairment of transportation-related infrastructure such as roadways, railways, pipelines, maritime ports, and aviation facilities.  Vulnerabilities in cable-supported bridges, signage, elevated cables, railway signaling, and towering structures.

 Disruption of electronic transportation infrastructures including signaling systems.  Diminished safety conditions for vehicles driving.  Degradation of coastal highways due to erosion.  Elevated tides posing threats to port and harbor installations, as well as low-level aviation infrastructure.  Recurrent and sustained inundation.  Scouring of bridges.  Deterioration through corrosion.

 Less or more snow / ice for all modes  Road, rail, airport, pipeline embankments failures  New northern shipping routes Reduced ice loading on structures, such as bridges or piers  Ice-jam flooding risk Climate change is likely to threaten transportation systems both temporarily through extreme weather events and permanently through gradual changes (Markolf et al., 2019).

Sudden extreme weather events, floods and landslides can increase the risks of disruption in transportation systems such as delays, disruptions, damage and malfunctions. Gabela and Sarmiento (2020) investigated the effects of the 2013 floods in Germany on road freight transport and found that 23% of all main roads were damaged during floods.

A study of the effects of the climate crisis on critical infrastructure found that high temperatures alone will account for around 92% of total hazard damage in Europe’s transport sector by 2080, largely as roads are built for cooler times. (Forzieri vd., 2018). The increase in the number of floods and excessively snowy days on the highways will shorten the economic life of the roads. More frequent maintenance, repair and rebuilding activities will result in higher costs.

For example, the African continent faces a cost of US$183.6 billion to repair and maintain roads as a result of damage from temperature and precipitation changes from potential climate change by 2100 (Chinowsky et al., 2011).

Extreme weather events cause great risks to rails, bridges, tunnels, energy and communication systems, and extreme temperatures cause rails to buckle in railways and trains to derail or collide 377 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains (Rail Safety and Standards Board, 2003).

In 2021, the financial impact of wildfires and heavy rains on Union Pacific, North America's largest rail freight company, was approximately $100 million as it caused gradual disruptions to the company's 32,000-mile network (URL 31). Climate change also affects airport operations in different ways. The terminal and flight operations will need to be modified due to variations in wind speed and direction, temperature, and air density (Williams, 2016).

In the "Climate Change Risk and Resilience" report prepared by the European Air Navigation Safety Organization (Eurocontrol) (2013), the main potential risks of climate change for the European aviation sector are as follows; • Temperature increase • Changes in precipitation (rain and snow) • Changes in storm patterns • Changes in wind patterns • Sea level rise and storm surges Analyzing the infrastructure of more than 14,000 airports worldwide and their exposure to storm surges for current and future sea level, Yesudian and Dawson (2021) concluded that 269 airports are currently at risk of coastal flooding.

According to the aforesaid research, a temperature increase of 2°C in line with the Paris Agreement will cause 100 airports to remain below the mean sea level and 364 airports to face the risk of flooding. Airport operations may be interrupted or halted by flooding of airport terminals, electricity and lighting infrastructure, navigation and communication systems, inter-terminal transit, or runways.

Because important utility infrastructure is frequently underground, minor water leaks can harm fundamental components (Burbidge, 2018).

There are risks of climate change causing the following problems in aviation operations (Eurocontrol, 2018); • Aircraft performance changes • Runway length issues • Efficiency and flight range problems • Demand redistribution (geographic) • Redistribution of demand (seasonal) • Increased cooling and heating requirements • Heat damage to airport surfaces (runways and taxiways) • Structural problems caused by changes in permafrost Ports, which are the driving force of economic growth and development, play a significant role in meeting human needs and in global trade.

As more than 80% by volume of global trade in goods are transported by sea, ports are crucial links in production, distribution and supply chains based on low-cost transportation (URL 32). In 2021, the cargo and shipping activities of ports on the US west coast supported more than 12 million jobs across the US and a total economic value of approximately $2 trillion, accounting for approximately 8.7% of the nation's GDP (Martin Associates, 2022).

Ports are highly vulnerable to extreme weather conditions due to their nature being built at sea level and serving in open areas. Disruption of port operations, with damage to port infrastructures and equipment, will lead to disruption of supply chains and disruption to trade globally. Hurricane Sandy, which hit the ports of New York and New Jersey in 2012, disrupted maritime operations and facilities and caused approximately $2.2 billion in damage (Smythe, 2013).

In general, the maritime sector is affected by the increase in sea levels in port activities and the increase in the severity of storms in voyage services (Asariotis and Benamara, 2012). 378 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik River transport, known as inland waterway transport, is also affected by extreme temperatures with changing climate, similar to other modes of transport.

In Europe, transportation could not be carried out due to the fall in the water level in 2018 in the Rhine River, which connects Germany and Switzerland to Rotterdam. Approximately 80% of inland waterway transport, which constitutes 6% of Germany's total transport volume, takes place on the Rhine, the most important inland waterway in Germany and Western Europe (Ademmer et al., 2020).

The water level of 80 cm, which is necessary for the safe floating of the barges used in river transport, has decreased to 25 cm. The banks of the river, which is approximately 1200 km long, are home to some of Germany's largest industrial companies, including the world's largest chemical plant. The suspension of river transport due to drought caused industrial plants to cut production for several weeks and gave the German economy a short-term shock (URL 33).

In August 2022, the water level dropped to 47 cm and the container ships had to carry some of their planned cargoes to avoid running aground, resulting in high transportation costs and serious delays in deliveries (URL 34). Although global warming negatively affects humanity, the melting of glaciers offers new business opportunities in the Arctic region.

Since the geographical distance between the continents is less in the Arctic than in the southern regions, northern countries have started to build submarine fiber optic cables in Arctic waters (URL 35). Furthermore, new transportation routes are emerging as an alternative to the Suez Canal and Cape of Good Hope crossings in the Arctic region. Alternative new routes in the North Pole provide approximately 35% distance savings compared to traditional maritime trade routes (Çevik and Durukan, 2020).

4.3. Insurance Climate change also affects the insurance industry. Businesses transfer the risks brought by extreme weather conditions to insurance companies and as the risks increase, the premiums paid increase. Between 1980 and 2020, extreme weather events caused 487 billion Euros of economic loss in the member states of the European Environment Agency and accounted for approximately 80% of the total economic losses caused by natural disasters (URL 36).

Global economic losses from natural and man-made disasters increased from USD 150 billion in 2019 to USD 202 billion in 2020. Estimated global insured losses from natural disasters in the first half of 2022 amounted to USD 35 billion, exceeding the average of the last decade by 22% (Swiss Re, 2020; URL 37).

The increase in pandemics and natural disasters in recent years has also negatively affected reinsurance companies, and some reinsurance companies have implemented a 12% premium increase in property and casualty insurance, which includes natural disaster insurance and other types of insurance, in July 2022 (URL 38). 4.4.

Other Logistics Activities Logistics activities include transportation, stock management, warehouse management, packaging, order processing, handling, customs clearance, customer services, information management, demand forecasting, after-sales service, factory-warehouse location selection, purchasing, and waste parts management. Transportation, stock management and warehouse management are considered as the prominent basic logistics activities.

These three activities are the key activities carried out within the entire logistics channel (Nalçakan and Er, 2012) . Since these logistics operations (packaging, order processing, handling, customs, etc. ), other than basic logistics activities, are generally carried out in closed areas, extreme weather events primarily affect employee. Inadequate ventilation, heating and cooling systems of buildings will negatively affect the workforce (Yavuz et al., 2020).

Extreme temperatures may negatively affect electrical infrastructure, digital systems and power supplies, and these interruptions may disrupt 379 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains business processes. Extreme weather events may hinder activities such as transportation, support and personnel recruitment carried out before and after these operations.

Inventory control management has a strong impact on the performance and profitability of the firm, increasing efficiency and reducing costs in the supply chain process (Khan and Siddiqui, 2019). Increasing extreme weather events may lead to increased transportation costs, which in turn may lead to increased raw material acquisition costs.

To fulfill production contracts and maintain production, businesses may consume raw materials and intermediate products faster than planned, ultimately reducing the inventory of unfinished products. Climate impact increases the likelihood of road closures and traffic stops, reducing the speed at which finished products reach customers, resulting in product backlogs and a significant increase in finished product inventory (He et al., 2023).

Since customs revenues arise mainly from customs duties, taxes and duties applied to goods subject to import and export, climate change may have various impacts on these revenues. Disruptions caused by climate change, such as extreme weather events, prolonged droughts or floods, can disrupt supply chains and business models, ultimately reducing trade volumes and therefore customs revenues (Soro, 2023).

The number of climate elements that concern the company affects the positive financial performance of companies. Businesses that are less dependent on the natural environment may continue normal business operations and therefore experience positive sales growth, whereas businesses that are highly dependent on weather conditions will, conversely, experience a decline in sales (Bergmann et al., 2016).

Extreme weather events caused by climate change can cause disruptions to supply chain facilities, changes in workforce productivity, variability in demand and declines in delivery performance. These problems in supply chains multiply exponentially throughout the network, leading to reduced efficiency, profits, delivery times and therefore order fulfillment.

The fact that climate change affects both the internal and external environment of the business in unexpected ways causes problems in achieving planning and forecasting goals (Er Kara et al., 2021). Packaging has a critical role in the storage, transportation and handling of products, and in protecting and preserving the products (URL 39). However, unexpected sudden changes in weather conditions can affect packaging materials and compromise their ability to keep the products inside safe.

Changing weather conditions such as extreme temperature and humidity during transportation of the products will negatively affect products that spoil quickly due to packaging that loses its function. Employees serving in this area will be negatively affected by extreme weather events. 5. METHOD In this study, literature review and expert interview technique, one of the qualitative research methods, was used to reveal the effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains.

This study’s data came from secondary information made available by primary research in related field. In recent years, secondary data has grown in significance for study in a variety of fields, including sociology, economics, and political science (Trzesniewski et al., 2011).

The researchers 380 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik answered crucial research concerns by analyzing secondary data in a way that broadened or reinterpreted key findings in the area (Greenhoot and Dowsett, 2012). Expert interviewing, as a qualitative research method that aims to explore or collect data on a particular area of interest, has been a frequently used method in political and social research since the early 1990s (Döringer, 2021).

Interviews are the most commonly used data collection method, and the semi-structured format is the most frequently used interview technique in qualitative research (Kallio et al., 2016). According to Mergel et al.’s ( 2019) definition, an expert is a person who possesses technical, procedural, and interpretive knowledge relevant to their fields of expertise.

The advantages of using expert interviews, which have long been popular in social research, for the researcher are as follows (Bogner et al., 2009);  Talking to experts during the discovery process of a study is a more efficient and collective method of collecting data than quantitative surveys.  Interviewing experts can help shorten lengthy data collection processes, especially because experts provide practical knowledge from within the organisation.

 Interviewing experts is appropriate when it is difficult or impossible to access a particular social area  Additionally, if the expert being interviewed also holds a key position in the organization, opportunities to expand the researcher's access to the field may be uncovered during this interview.

In qualitative research, the adequacy of sample size is relative; While a sample size of 10 is sufficient for certain types of homogeneous or critical case sampling, it may be considered too small to develop a complex phenomenon or theory (Sandelowski, 1995). There is no exact number of samples that researchers should include in their studies.

However, it is recommended that researchers include at least 8 to 15 participants to obtain a large enough sample so that they can determine whether their findings are representative of more than one person (Hill et al., 1997). 10 experts were interviewed in the research. The interviewees who participated in the research were coded as P1, P2, P3... with the letter ‘‘P’’ meaning ‘‘participant’’. Interviews were conducted face to face and by telephone in February/March 2024.

Interviewees were promised anonymity in any publication and as a result only identifying them by their role in their organization. In this study, it is aimed to answer the following research questions in particular: RQ1: What is the impact of extreme weather events on logistics operations? RQ2: How does climate change affect supply chains in general? Although this research focuses on supply chains, it is expected to contribute to the literature on its effects on international logistics activities.

6. RESULTS In order to determine their perspectives on the effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains, two questions were asked to the managers and employees of production, transportation and warehouse companies; one question was asked to employees in the customs, packaging, handling and delivery business and an occupational health and safety (OHS) expert in Turkey.

381 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains RQ1: What is the impact of extreme weather events on logistics operations ? RQ2: How does climate change affect supply chains in general? P1: (Mid-level manager in warehouse industry) A1: ‘‘Especially heavy rains in recent years caused floods, causing minor damage to our warehouse. We know that some of our friends in the industry have had more than one flood in their warehouses.

Even though there are no problems in our warehouse on extremely rainy days, the vehicles that bring goods to and from the warehouse experience delays due to floods and puddles on the roads.

Furthermore, our friends we have talked to in the industry say that extreme heat, especially in the summer months, has increased the energy costs of cold-storage warehouses.’’ A2: ‘‘As I mentioned, when excessive rainfall affects the transportation infrastructure, it becomes difficult to reach ports or factories, it can disrupt the transportation of raw materials or inputs to factories, logistics processes, and cause delays in supply chains.

It causes businesses to change their plans and sometimes even cause financial losses.’’ P2: (Mid-level manager in production) A1: ‘‘We operate a factory that processes agricultural products. Farmers or brokers bring us the grains. However, in some rural areas, we send trucks to farmers who want to send their grain to our factory. The bridge that provides transportation to the village was damaged due to the flood and we cannot bring the product.

Or the farmer cannot take machinery to his field for harvesting.’’ A2: ‘‘Heavy rains during the grain harvest season not only reduce the quality of goods but also cause producers' products to be flooded. Prices vary widely locally during periods of floods or heavy rain during peak harvest season. There are grain silos in our factories. We know that silos in some places have been damaged in strong storms in recent years.

The industry now attaches importance to the durability of buildings.’’ P3: (Mid-level manager in railway company) A1: ‘‘In railway transportation, transportation cannot be carried out when floods damage the ground on which the rails are laid. During periods of heavy rainfall, soil or rocks may fall on the rails as a result of landslides. A similar event occurred was in 2024. In fact, although extreme heat does not affect our entire line, it mostly affects the line in the southern regions.

Heated rails expand and can start to curve this is known as buckling, which can lead to accidents. In addition, since our employees in some units work outdoors, there is a risk of health problems in extremely hot weather.’’ A2: ‘‘In general, considering Turkey's railway lines, alternative routes are used in case of road interruption in any region. However, this alternative route can sometimes cover very long distances. In this case, the sender of the goods has to bear serious costs.

In addition to the cost, the time also increases. The plans of the sender's recipient customer may be disrupted. If some of the loaded wagons are damaged on the road, the production of the recipient company may be disrupted.’’ P4: (Mid-level manager in airline company) A1: ‘‘Weather is an important data source for aviation. Uncertainty in weather forecasts or sudden changes can make the weather's suitability for flight unpredictable.

Such situations can make flight planning and flight route selection difficult. Excessive rainfall may damage the apron or infrastructure. I don't remember any large-scale incident in Turkey where the apron was affected by floods, but we know that floods have occurred at airports in different countries in recent years. Extreme temperatures can sometimes be a problem for employees working on the apron. Strong storms can cause equipment on the apron to move and crash into aircraft.

Since all these disruptions 382 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik ultimately concern the passenger, they affect your service quality and customer satisfaction. Cancellations and delays can cause undesirable situations such as chaos at airports.’’ A2: ‘‘When we look at the characteristic features of air cargo transportation, these cargoes are valuable, sensitive and must be transported quickly.

In cases where airports cannot provide service due to long-term extreme weather events, these cargoes will not reach their recipients on time. Especially today, some inputs of companies that produce in just-in-time production model are transported by air cargo. In this case, there will be a risk of the production line halting. Additionally, race horses or Formula 1 racing vehicles are also transported by air. These organizations are of worldwide importance.

When we look at air transportation from the passenger perspective, business travel has a significant share. Time is important for senior executives who hold business meetings in different countries of the world. Delaying the flights of these executives may lead to business losses.’’ P5: ( Executive in road transport company) A1: ‘‘On rainy days, intercity main roads do not cause much trouble, but district roads or bridge crossings may flood.

While passing through mountainous regions, rocks or soil from the mountain block the road. In this case, we have to wait. If there is a facility nearby where we can park for a long time, we wait there, but otherwise we have to stay in the truck on cold days, in which case we experience fuel problems. If we get caught in snow or rain in the city, there is long traffic.

When the weather is very hot in the summer, asphalt melts and this negatively affects us drivers.’’ A2: ‘‘When it rains or snows a lot, if we are on the road, we are forced to reduce our speed. Of course, this delays the delivery of cargo. We have had disputes regarding delay in freight delivery several times. When the weather is too hot or too cold, the loads we carry can be affected.

Of course, no one wants their good to be damaged.’’ P6: (Mid-level manager in port operation) A1: ‘‘By their nature, ports are located at flat areas and seaside. They are vulnerable to winds and floods. Excessive rainfall can cause floods. Even if there is no puddle in the ports, it can affect traffic on the roads accessing the ports. Extreme winds can blow empty containers in ports or knock down cranes that load and unload containers, restraining operations.

Similarly, there may be a risk of containers falling from ships traveling at sea. In general, excessive rains and winds can stress operations in ports.’’ A2: ‘‘These factors affecting maritime transportation can generally interrupt transportation and port operations and cause delays. These negativities are reflected in transportation costs and insurance expenses. The entire supply chain can be negatively affected in terms of both time and cost. Interruption of port operations can cause delays.

When the goods are delayed in reaching their destination, the inputs of the manufacturing enterprises are delayed and production plans can be disrupted.’’ Q: What is the impact of extreme weather events on logistics operations ? P7: (Staffer in custom operation) A: ‘‘During the summer season, extreme heat does not affect the operations and passage of commercial vehicles and individual vehicles. If the vehicles have entered the customs area, border crossing and customs procedures are carried out.

However, there may be some difficulties for the working staff. Some of our colleagues have experienced cases of sunstroke, but support personnel are immediately assigned to replace the staff with health problems, services and operations continue 383 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains without interruption. Since customs areas are open and wide areas, they can be exposed to floods.

We have experienced floods and flooding in recent years, but since critical systems such as electricity and digital infrastructure were not damaged, there was no disruption in customs procedures. Of course, in the event of a flood that damages these systems, business processes will be interrupted.

Excessive snowfall at border gates and customs areas in high-altitude geographical regions causes difficulties for employee in reaching their workplaces.’’ P8: (Assistant Professor in Occupational health and safety (OHS)) A: ‘‘Optimum temperature, humidity and wind conditions, which we call thermal comfort in indoor environments, indicate the suitability of the workplace. For light work, the room temperature should be 22-24C°.

During heavy work, body temperature increases due to muscle movements producing energy, so the room temperature should be low. Those who work in open areas may be exposed to sunlight and skin disorders may occur in these people. To prevent this, it is necessary to have full personal protective equipment such as mask, glasses and cream.

Since the musculoskeletal system will be more sensitive in extremely windy weather, employees working in these conditions are more likely to experience health problems. Monitoring the health of employees by performing periodic health checks in rainy weather and other adverse weather conditions is important for work efficiency.’’ P9: (Staffer in delivery operation) A: ‘‘Since we go to delivery with open vehicles, which we call motorcycles, extreme temperatures affect us a lot.

Likewise, in extremely windy and snowy weather, there are risks of both traffic accidents and diseases. On days when delivery cannot be made, work piles up and drags it to the next days as a workload. Recipient complain about delayed deliveries. During flood events and extremely rainy days, urban traffic is heavy, which delays deliveries too, we have to change routes, and the extra distance increases the fuel cost.

When distribution/delivery businesses serving in industrial zones delay deliveries on days when there is a lot of rain or snow, the lack of parts, tools and components needed by industrial businesses disrupts production work. Additionally, since industrial zones are located outside residential areas in some cities, deliveries are made on a certain day of the week. If delivery cannot be made that day, it will be delayed until the next week, resulting in a serious loss of time.

Since the delivery/distribution sector generally works with insufficient personnel, there is a lot of workload due to the lack of personnel with health problems, which causes an increase in the workload of other personnel.’’ P10: (Staffer in packaging and handling operationin warehouse) A: ‘‘Extreme weather events affect the personnel working in packaging, handling and other valueadded works and processes in the warehouses (indoor areas).

On days when the weather is very hot, if the ventilation or cooling systems of the buildings are inadequate, employees get tired more quickly and their work performance decreases. If the weather is very cold, employees experience health problems more often. Sweating and cold weather during busy working days cause illness. There are similar effects for those who work outdoors. However, there are also health problems such as sunstroke in outdoors.

In regions where the winter season is intense, if warehouses or work sites are outside the city, getting to work may be disrupted because snowfall closes the roads.’’ 7. CONCLUSION The global pandemic has wreaked unpredictable damage to supply chain networks, but beyond shipping delays and parts shortages, climate change presents a longer-term challenge for supply chains.

Climate change affects a different part of supply chains, as different geographies 384 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik experience different extreme weather events due to their characteristic climate characteristics. The business world is deeply interconnected due to international trade. The effects of climate change, which is a systemic problem, will directly or indirectly affect every company.

For different companies, this will transform to different costs (URL 40). This study, which was conducted to investigate the effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains, achieved some important results. First of all, the research results show that extreme weather events resulting from climate change affect operations, in the context of the opinions of participants from different areas of logistics and supply chains.

The majority of the participants stated that extreme weather events affected their operations or also affected the previous or post-stage of their operations (in transportation to the operation area or in the transportation of departing vehicles to their next destination). The fact that the majority of business processes in transportation operations are carried out in open areas shows that infrastructure or facilities and especially employees, are vulnerable to extreme weather events.

An interruption occurring at one point in the supply chain will affect the entire chain throughout the network, causing businesses to change their production and post-production plans, and will also have a negative impact in terms of cost and time. Careful monitoring of the working conditions of employees in packaging, handling and value-added operations in indoor areas against extreme weather events will prevent possible health problems.

Different hazards arise as a result of climate change, which refers to long-term changes in local, regional and global temperatures and weather patterns. The consequences of climate change, such as temperature change, water stress, excessive precipitation, wildfire, sea level rise, hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones, socio-economic vulnerability, have a variety of potential impacts on different businesses in different parts of the world.

The decrease in transportation costs, the development of technology and the globalized production system have increased the connections between producers and consumers all over the world and have made the smooth flow of goods in the supply chains. However, since an interruption in one link of the supply chain will affect the entire chain, it is important for businesses to be prepared for such interruptions in advance. All factors of production are affected by climate change.

The forced migration of millions of people due to the sudden dangers caused by weather conditions such as floods, storms, forest fires, and extreme temperatures and the loss of their lives due to these hazards will cause a loss of labor required for production. Physical assets such as buildings that make up production facilities and warehouses can be damaged or destroyed by hazards such as excessive precipitation, floods and forest fires.

The transportation sector, which contributes to the welfare of societies and is an important sector in the economic development of countries, is perhaps the area where climate change first showed its impact. Sudden extreme weather events, floods and landslides disrupt transportation infrastructures and cause interruptions in supply chains. Extreme temperatures damage the railway lines by disrupting the ground on the highways and by causing the rails to buckle in the railways.

Similarly, heavy rainfall interrupts both modes of transport. The aviation industry is affected by adverse conditions such as changes in storm patterns and sea level rise as a result of the changing climate. Extreme weather events can cause disruption or interruption of airport operations by damaging power and lighting infrastructure, navigation and communication equipment in airport terminals.

Ports are highly vulnerable to extreme weather conditions due to their nature being built at sea level and serving in open areas. Damage to port infrastructures and equipment will cause disruption of operations and halt global trade in ports where 80% of the world's goods trade is handled.

A model change has become imperative in the planning, 385 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains investment and operation strategies of ports, which operate at the forefront of climate change, at the center of global development, and which are the most important transit route of world trade. The destruction caused by severe weather events in recent years has begun to seriously affect the insurance industry.

Large amounts of compensation payments by insurance companies caused reinsurance companies to increase their premiums. Whether the world warms more or less, societies will need to change the way they live and work. With climate change exacerbating extreme weather events, world societies today have to renew their world architecture and infrastructure for unexpected situations.

Making buildings, cities, supply chains, and even agriculture weatherproof is essential to having a chance to live with climate change. This study, which investigates the operational effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains, is expected to be a stepping stone for further research and to provide a new perspective in investigating the economic effects of climate change on logistics and supply chains REFERENCES Ademmer, M., Jannsen, N., & Mösle, S. (2020).

Extreme weather events and economic activity: The case of low water levels on the Rhine river. Kiel Working Paper. Andreoni, V., Miola, A. (2015). Climate change and supply-chain vulnerability: Methodologies for resilience and impacts quantification. International Journal of Emergency Services, 4(1), 6–26. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJES-09-2014-0012 Asariotis, R., Benamara, H. (2012). Maritime transport and the climate change challenge. Routledge. Becker, A., Ng, A. K. Y., McEvoy, D., & Mullett, J. (2018).

Implications of climate change for shipping: Ports and supply chains. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 9(2), e508. Bergmann, A., Stechemesser, K., & Guenther, E. (2016). Natural resource dependence theory: Impacts of extreme weather events on organizations. Journal of Business Research, 69(4), 1361–1366 Bogner, A., Littig, B., & Menz, W. (2009). Introduction: Expert interviews—An introduction to a new methodological debate. In Interviewing experts (pp. 1–13). Springer.

Breidenich, C., Magraw, D., Rowley, A., & Rubin, J. W. (1998). The Kyoto protocol to the United Nations framework convention on climate change. American Journal of International Law, 92(2), 315–331. Burbidge, R. (2018). Adapting aviation to a changing climate: Key priorities for action. Journal of Air Transport Management, 71, 167–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jairtraman.2018.04.004 Carleton, T. A., & Hsiang, S. M. (2016). Social and economic impacts of climate. In Science (Vol. 353, Issue 6304).

American Association for the Advancement of Science. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad9837 Chinowsky, P., Schweikert, A., Strzepek, N., Manahan, K., & Strzepek, K. (2011). Adaptation advantage to climate change impacts on road infrastructure in Africa through 2100 (Issue 2011/25). WIDER Working Paper. Cœuré, B. (2018). Monetary policy and climate change.

Speech at a Conference on" Scaling up Green Finance: The Role of Central Banks", Organised by the Network for Greening the Financial System, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Council on Economic Policies, Berlin, 8. 386 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik Cui, Q., Xie, W., & Liu, Y. (2018). Effects of sea level rise on economic development and regional disparity in China. Journal of Cleaner Production, 176, 1245–1253. Çevik, V. A., & Durukan, T. (2020).

Çin’in Kuzey Kutbu’na Olan İlgisi: Kutup İpek Yolu. Akdeniz İİBF Dergisi, 20(2), 254–262. https://doi.org/10.25294/auiibfd.827510 Çevik, V. A., & Durukan, T. (2021). Covid-19 Pandemisinin Küresel Ticarete İlk Etkileri. Kafkas Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, 12(24), 1027–1055. https://doi.org/10.36543/kauiibfd.2021.042 Dasaklis, T. K., & Pappis, C. P. (2013). Supply chain management in view of climate change: an overview of possible impacts and the road ahead.

Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management (JIEM), 6(4), 1139– 1161. http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jiem.883 Döringer, S. (2021). ‘The problem-centred expert interview’. Combining qualitative interviewing approaches for investigating implicit expert knowledge. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 24(3), 265–278. Er Kara, M., Ghadge, A., & Bititci, U. S. (2021). Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance.

International Journal of Production Research, 59(24), 7317–7335. Eurocontrol. (2013). Challenges of growth 2013. Eurocontrol Brussels. Eurocontrol. (2018). European Aviation in 2040—Challenges of Growth. Eurocontrol Brussels, Belgium. Forzieri, G., Bianchi, A., e Silva, F. B., Herrera, M. A. M., Leblois, A., Lavalle, C., Aerts, J. C. J. H., & Feyen, L. (2018). Escalating impacts of climate extremes on critical infrastructures in Europe. Global Environmental Change, 48, 97–107.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.11.007 Gabela, J. G. F., & Sarmiento, L. (2020). The effects of the 2013 floods on Germany’s freight traffic. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, 82, 102274. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2020.102274 Garmabaki, A. H. S., Thaduri, A., Famurewa, S., & Kumar, U. (2021). Adapting railway maintenance to climate change. Sustainability, 13(24), 13856. Ghadge, A., Wurtmann, H., & Seuring, S. (2020).

Managing climate change risks in global supply chains: a review and research agenda. International Journal of Production Research, 58(1), 44–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2019.1629670 Godde, C. M., Mason-D’Croz, D., Mayberry, D. E., Thornton, P. K., & Herrero, M. (2021). Impacts of climate change on the livestock food supply chain; a review of the evidence. Global Food Security, 28, 100488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2020.100488 Gopinath, G. (2020).

The great lockdown: Worst economic downturn since the great depression. IMF Blog, 14, 2020. Greenhoot, A. F., & Dowsett, C. J. (2012). Secondary data analysis: An important tool for addressing developmental questions. Journal of Cognition and Development, 13(1), 2–18. He, X., Xu, X., & Shen, Y. (2023). How climate change affects enterprise inventory management-From the perspective of regional traffic. Journal of Business Research, 162, 113864. Hill, C. E., Thompson, B. J., & Williams, E. N. (1997).

A guide to conducting consensual qualitative research. The Counseling Psychologist, 25(4), 517–572. 387 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains Izaguirre, C., Losada, I. J., Camus, P., Vigh, J. L., & Stenek, V. (2021). Climate change risk to global port operations. Nature Climate Change, 11(1), 14–20. Kallio, H., Pietilä, A., Johnson, M., & Kangasniemi, M. (2016). Systematic methodological review: developing a framework for a qualitative semi‐structured interview guide.

Journal of Advanced Nursing, 72(12), 2954– 2965. Karagül, M. (2014). Kalkınma sürecinde üretim faktörlerinin yeniden tanımlanması. Leges Ekonomik ve Hukuk Araştırmaları Dergisi, 1(1), 1–11. Khan, F., & Siddiqui, D. A. (2019). Impact of Inventory Management on firm’s efficiency–a quantitative research study on departmental stores operating in Karachi. Social Science and Humanities Journal, 3(4), 964–980. Koks, E., Pant, R., Thacker, S., & Hall, J. W. (2019).

Understanding business disruption and economic losses due to electricity failures and flooding. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 10(4), 421–438. Lambert, D., Stock, J. R., & Ellram, L. M. (1998). Fundamentals of logistics management. McGraw-Hill/Irwin. Larson, P. D., & Rogers, D. S. (1998). Supply chain management: definition, growth and approaches. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 6(4), 1–5.

https://doi.org/10.1080/10696679.1998.11501805 Leitold, R., Garschagen, M., Tran, V., & Diez, J. R. (2021). Flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation of manufacturing firms: Global knowledge gaps and lessons from Ho Chi Minh City. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 61, 102351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2021.102351 Markolf, S. A., Hoehne, C., Fraser, A., Chester, M. V, & Underwood, B. S. (2019).

Transportation resilience to climate change and extreme weather events–Beyond risk and robustness. Transport Policy, 74, 174–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2018.11.003 Martin Associates. (2022). Martin Associates Research: The Economic Impacts of West Coast Ports. Mazzacurati, E., Vargas Mallard, D., Turner, J., Steinberg, N., & Shaw, C. (2017). Measuring Physical Climate Risk in Equity Portfolios. Deutsche Asset Management Global Research Group: Frankfurt, Germany.

Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., & Haug, N. (2019). Defining digital transformation: Results from expert interviews. Government Information Quarterly, 36(4), 101385. Mimura, N. (2013). Sea-level rise caused by climate change and its implications for society. Proceedings of the Japan Academy, Series B, 89(7), 281–301. https://doi.org/10.2183/pjab.89.281 Nalçakan, M., & Er, F. (2012). Lojistik İlkeleri. Eskişehir: TC Anadolu Üniversitesi Yayını, 2517. Nemry, F., & Demirel, H. (2012).

Impacts of Climate Change on Transport: A focus on road and rail transport infrastructures. European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), Institute for Prospective Technological Studies (IPTS). Pankratz, N., & Schiller, C. (2021). Climate change and adaptation in global supply-chain networks. Proceedings of Paris December 2019 Finance Meeting EUROFIDAI-ESSEC, European Corporate Governance Institute–Finance Working Paper, 775. Parajuli, R., Thoma, G., & Matlock, M. D. (2019).

Environmental sustainability of fruit and vegetable production supply chains in the face of climate change: A review. Science of the Total Environment, 650, 2863–2879. 388 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik Rail Safety and Standards Board. (2003). Railway Safety Implications of Weather, Climate and Climate Change. Ryley, T., Baumeister, S., & Coulter, L. (2020). Climate change influences on aviation: A literature review. Transport Policy, 92, 55–64.

Smythe, T. C. (2013). Assessing the impacts of Hurricane Sandy on the Port of New York and New Jersey’s Maritime responders and response infrastructure. Natural Hazards Center. Sandelowski, M. (1995). Sample size in qualitative research. Research in Nursing & Health, 18(2), 179–183. Solaymani, S. (2019). CO2 emissions patterns in 7 top carbon emitter economies: the case of transport sector. Energy, 168, 989–1001. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.11.145 Soro, S. J. (2023).

The Impact of Climate Change on Customs Revenues in The Waemu Zone. Jurnal BPPK: Badan Pendidikan Dan Pelatihan Keuangan, 16(2), 113–120. Stern, N. (2015). Why are we waiting? : The logic, urgency, and promise of tackling climate change. Mit Press. Stern, V., Peters, S., & Bakhshi, V. (2010). The stern review. Government Equalities Office, Home Office. Swiss Re. (2020). Natural catastrophes in 2020: Secondary perils in the spotlight, but don’t forget primaryperil risks. Sigma, 1, 2021.

Tanglis, M., & Devine, S. (2018). Extreme heat and unprotected workers: Public Citizen petitions OSHA to protect the millions of workers who labor in dangerous temperatures. Washington, DC: Public Citizen. Tol, R. S. J. (2009). The economic effects of climate change. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(2), 29–51. DOI: 10.1257/jep.23.2.29 Trzesniewski, K. H., Donnellan, M. B., & Lucas, R. E. (2011). Secondary data analysis: An introduction for psychologists. JSTOR. Yavuz, Ş., Gür, B., & Yavuz, A. (2020).

İmalat işlerinde çalışanlarda iş sağlığı ve güvenliği algı düzeyinin incelenmesi. Journal of Social and Humanities Sciences Research, 7(59), 2618–2627.

URL 1, https://covid19.who.int/ Accessed June 25, 2022, URL 2, https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/2021/09/24/the-climate-has-overtaken-covid-19-asgerman-voters-top-concern Accessed June 25, 2022 URL 3, https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/2021-tied-for-6th-warmest-year-in-continued-trend-nasaanalysis-shows Accessed June 25, 2022 URL 4, https://www.ft.com/content/b08807de-cae0-11e8-9fe5-24ad351828ab Accessed June 25, 2022 URL 5, https://climate.nasa.gov/resources/global-warming-vs-climate-change/ Accessed .

June 26, 2022 URL 6, https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/what-is-climate-change Accessed June 26, 2022 URL 7, https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/tdstat45_en.pdf Accessed February 12, 2021 URL 8, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2020/09/17/the-great-disrupter Accessed February 12, 2021 389 Impacts of Climate Change on Logistics and Supply Chains URL 9, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-3/ Accessed July 3, 2022 URL 10, https://cscmp.org/CSCMP/Educate/SCM_Definitions_and_Glossary_of_Terms.aspx Accessed June 26, 2022 URL 11, https://www.economist.com/leaders/2019/02/21/climate-change-and-the-threat-to-companies Accessed August 22, 2022 URL 12, https://www.mckinsey.com.br/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/confrontingclimate-risk Accessed August 22, 2022 URL 13, https://www.ft.com/content/bef4699a-1ce7-47e8-b696-40bdc1eb1449 Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 14, https://www.ft.com/content/8b118e44-a256-4aae-aaa0-464009276e56 Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 15, https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2020-01/global-advisorclimate-change-consumer-behavior.pdf Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 16, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2016/01/13/climate-change-is-a-threat---andan-opportunity---for-the-private-sector Accessed June 27, 2022 URL 17, https://www.unhcr.org/news/latest/2016/11/581f52dc4/frequently-asked-questions-climatechange-disaster-displacement.html Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 18, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/sustainability/our-insights/climate-risk-andresponse-physical-hazards-and-socioeconomic-impacts Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 19, https://www.reuters.com/article/thailand-floods-supplychain-idUSL3E7LH0GK20111017 Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 20, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-ii/ Accessed June 28, 2022 URL 21, https://globalcanopy.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/Why-net-zero-needs-zerodeforestation-now-June-2022.pdf Accessed July 3, 2022 URL 22, https://www.ft.com/content/d0224863-6071-436d-a628-d7f3a71cb36f Accessed August 24, 2022 URL 23, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2020/09/17/a-grim-outlook Accessed June 28, 2022, URL 24, https://www.ft.com/content/ec2f93ad-d23c-4ff4-867a-59385d1cc8a6 Accessed August 20, 2022 URL 25, https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Ocean-fact-sheetpackage.pdf Accessed July 1, 2022 URL 26, http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2020/indexeh.htm Accessed July 1, 2022 URL 27, https://edo.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/news/GDO-EDODroughtNews202208_Europe.pdf Accessed August 24, 2022 URL 28, https://readyforclimate.org/reports/water-crisis-in-china/ Accessed August 24, 2022 URL 29, https://www.ft.com/content/7c2052b9-eaac-4f3e-9386-dfa3ae100206 Accessed August 21, 2022 390 Afet ve Risk Dergisi Cilt: 7 Sayı: 2, 2024 (368-391) Veli Ahmet Çevik URL 30, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/china/chinas-growing-water-crisis Accessed August 24, 2022 URL 31, https://www.ft.com/content/8f5c8360-19eb-437a-b55c-4c393ffa0ba5 Accessed July 4, 2022 URL 32, https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/cimem7d23_en.pdf; Accessed July 6, 2022 URL 33, https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-03-29/add-german-rain-and-rhine-waterlevels-to-investors-checklist-of-worries Accessed August 20, 2022, URL 34, https://www.ft.com/content/d6317b92-9c13-4f80-b5c8-de966adb6fcf Accessed August 20, 2022 URL 35, https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-warming-arctic-emerges-as-a-route-for-subsea-cables11655323903 Accessed July 7, 2022 URL 36, https://www.eea.europa.eu/ims/economic-losses-from-climate-related Accessed August 21, 2022, URL 37, https://www.swissre.com/press-release/Floods-and-storms-drive-global-insured-catastrophelosses-of-USD-38-billion-in-first-half-of-2022-Swiss-Re-Institute-estimates/4d31d695-e49f-4168-85bc2a5944313b05 Accessed August 21, 2022 URL 38, https://www.ft.com/content/cac643b3-dd22-4e85-befb-e1b8b153445b Accessed August 21, 2022 URL 39, https://www.toptier.com/en-us/blog-events/blog/how-temperature-changes-can-affectpackaging Accessed February 27, 2024 URL 40, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2020/09/17/directing-the-disruption Accessed June 28, 2022 Vajjarapu, H., Verma, A., & Gulzar, S. (2019).

Adaptation policy framework for climate change impacts on transportation sector in developing countries. Transportation in Developing Economies, 5(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40890-019-0071-y Wan, Z., El Makhloufi, A., Chen, Y., & Tang, J. (2018). Decarbonizing the international shipping industry: Solutions and policy recommendations. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 126, 428–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.11.064 Williams, P. D. (2016). Transatlantic flight times and climate change.

Environmental Research Letters, 11(2), 24008. DOI 10.1088/1748-9326/11/2/024008 Yesudian, A. N., & Dawson, R. J. (2021). Global analysis of sea level rise risk to airports. Climate Risk Management, 31, 100266. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2020.100266 Zhang, L., Long, R., Chen, H., & Yang, T. (2018). Analysis of an optimal public transport structure under a carbon emission constraint: a case study in Shanghai, China. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 25(4), 3348–3359.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-0660-4 Zhou, Q., Hanasaki, N., & Fujimori, S. (2018). Economic consequences of cooling water insufficiency in the thermal power sector under climate change scenarios. Energies, 11(10), 2686. https://doi.org/10.3390/en11102686 391 View publication stats



Weathering the Storm: Supply Chains and Climate Risk WP 24-03R Juanma Castro-Vincenzi Harvard University Gaurav Khanna University of California, San Diego Nicolas Morales Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Nitya Pandalai-Nayar University of Texas at Austin Weathering the Storm: Supply Chains and Climate Risk∗ Juanma Castro-Vincenzi University of Chicago Gaurav Khanna University of California, San Diego Nicolas Morales Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Nitya Pandalai-Nayar University of Texas at Austin and NBER September 2024 Abstract We characterize how firms structure supply chains under climate risk.

Using new data on the universe of firm-to-firm transactions from an Indian state, we show that firms diversify sourcing locations, and that suppliers exposed to climate risk charge lower prices. We develop a general equilibrium spatial model of firm input sourcing under climate risk. Firms diversify identical inputs from suppliers across space, trading off the probability of climate disruptions against higher input costs. We quantify the model using data on 271 Indian regions.

Wages are inversely correlated with sourcing risk, giving rise to a cost minimization-resilience tradeoff. Supply chain diversification unambiguously reduces real wage volatility, but ambiguously affects their levels, as diversification may come with high input costs. While diversification mitigates climate risk, it exacerbates the distributional consequences of climate change by reducing wages in regions prone to frequent shocks.

JEL: F14, L14 Keywords: Production networks, supply chains, economic geography, climate change ∗ We thank Claire Conzelmann and Simon Farbman for outstanding research assistance and Swapnika Rachapalli for sharing data.

We also thank our discussants David Atkin, Joaquin Blaum, Meredith Startz, Jose Vasquez, as well as Pol Antràs, Adrien Bilal, Chris Boehm, Olivier Coibion, Elhanan Helpman, Gabriel Kreindler, Andrei Levchenko, Hugo Lhuillier, Ezra Oberfield, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, audiences at Minnesota Macro, Princeton IES, Stanford, University of Michigan, St Louis Fed, Warwick, McGill, UQAM, UT Austin, NBER Summer Institute ITM, Midwest Macro, SED-Barcelona, WIEN - Vienna, TIGN, Empirical Macro Workshop and Kiel-CEPR Geopolitics Conference for helpful comments.

The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Board of Governors. Email: castrovincenzi@uchicago.edu, gakhanna@ucsd.edu, nicolas.morales@rich.frb.org and npnayar@utexas.edu. 1 Introduction The intersection of complex supply chains and climate risk presents a critical challenge to the global economy.

Complex supply chains yield significant efficiency gains worldwide, enabling firms to procure inputs from the most efficient suppliers regardless of location. Yet, escalating climate risk raises concerns about the vulnerability of interlinked production networks and the ensuing broader economic fragility (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Boehm et al., 2019). Increasing global risk of climate change heightens the likelihood of natural disasters such as flooding and storm surges.

In response, forward-looking firms may choose their production locations (Castro-Vincenzi, 2024), or diversify the locations of their suppliers based on geographic variability in climate threats, to mitigate the impact of disruptions to their production. Therefore, our understanding of how climate change may reshape economic production and its implications for welfare across regions hinges on firms’ adaptive sourcing decisions in response to escalating hazards.

In this paper, we provide a theoretical, empirical, and quantitative analysis of the spatial consequences of supply chain restructuring in light of increased climate risk. Studying the general equilibrium consequences of how firms structure supply chains when faced with climate hazards raises two important challenges.

First, for empirical evidence on how firms adapt to climate risk, we need high-frequency data on transactions along the supply chain, the precise locations of establishments, and meaningful variation in weather-related events.

Second, to quantify the broader economy-wide consequences, we require a general equilibrium model of firm input sourcing under climate risk, where firms face trade-offs such as the lower probability of climate shocks against higher costs, less productive inputs, or higher shipping costs.

To address the first challenge, we obtain the universe of establishment-to-establishment level transactions from a large state in India, as long as one node of the transaction (either buyer or seller) is in the state (the other node can be anywhere in the country). This dataset contains the precise zip code of the establishments, the value of the transaction, the product code, the date, the quantity (and so the unit values), and the unique tax ID of the establishment.

Using these data, we document important new motivating facts suggesting firms are optimizing supply chains to mitigate climate risk. First, firms diversify the locations they source from, multisourcing 74% of product value even within narrow product codes. Second, firms that multisource the same product buy from farther distances, dryer regions and pay higher prices. And third, suppliers in regions that are more exposed to climate risk tend to charge lower prices.

An advantage of our setting is that India experiences monsoonal rainfall that follows a somewhat predictable spatial pattern every year, although the intensity and timing can 1 vary. Regions across India are regularly and increasingly experiencing large flooding events that disrupt firm supply chains. Firms operating in this environment might reasonably consider the probability of climate-related disruptions in their operations, as suggested by our descriptive analysis.

To provide causal evidence of firm responses to climate shocks, we leverage the exogenous geographic and temporal variation in flooding events using an event study design. We show that the sales of flood-hit suppliers fall drastically over three months but recover by five months after a flood. The total purchases and sales of downstream buyers decrease substantially. Importantly, despite the shock, they are unlikely to substitute to other suppliers.

We show no difference in affected and unaffected firms in the pre-period. Our descriptive and event-study results together suggest firms plan for climate risk and recover from the realized shocks relatively quickly. Our second contribution is theoretical. To address the challenge of quantifying economywide impacts, we build a spatial general equilibrium model of firm sourcing under climate risk.

Motivated by our empirical results and the patterns in the data, firms diversify their sourcing of otherwise identical inputs across locations to mitigate climate risk. Such diversification comes with a trade-off: in general equilibrium, input prices are higher for places with lower climate risk, which might also be less productive, or geographically distant, necessitating payment of higher trade costs.

A key feature of the model is that firms’ expected profit functions in the presence of sourcing risk are concave in input orders.

That is, firms behave as if they are riskaverse, even in the absence of explicit managerial risk aversion.1 This implies that firms from each region will choose to diversify their input sourcing across regions if they face imperfectly correlated regional risk, even in the extreme case where regional fundamentals are constant across space, and trade is costly (a “symmetric” economy).

In a comparative statics exercise, we show that in this setting, there might be no conventional gains from trade, but trade still occurs purely due to the diversification motives of firms. As a result, despite identical fundamentals, “safer” regions see higher real wages in general equilibrium, while more distant or riskier regions see lower real wages.

Interestingly, this comparative statics exercise implies that the prices of inputs and, therefore, of regional consumption, are higher under costly trade than regional autarky. A stark insight from this exercise is that expected regional real wages can be lower under costly trade than under autarky, but their volatility is also lower.

With risk aversion in consumer preferences, the decrease in volatility offsets the decline in expected real wages, and diversification is welfare-improving, but aggregate output is lower. We show that free 1 Blaum et al. (2024) study firm input sourcing under shipping time risk where firms face a similar problem. In contrast, our focus is the multi-region general equilibrium.

2 trade in the symmetric economy brings both the diversification benefits of lower wage volatility and higher expected real wages compared to costly trade. We quantify this model using a census of manufacturing firms across the country, allowing us to estimate location-specific productivities and labor shares. We implement the model on 271 regions in India. To discipline the magnitude of disruptions, should one occur, we leverage the estimated input disruptions from our event studies.

Our model implies that bilateral sourcing shares are a function of all regional labor endowments, productivities, and bilateral trade costs, as well as the risk of sourcing in each region. Given estimates of regional labor, productivity, and bilateral trade costs, we back out the model-implied spatially correlated regional risk to match observed sourcing shares.

To validate our framework, we project the model-implied risk on climate observables such as rainfall, floods, temperature and dryness as well as other risk-related variables such as ruggedness/elevation and court capacity to capture institutional and geographic features that affect firm decisions. We find that climate-related risk is strongly positively correlated with the estimated risk probabilities, with an R2 of 0.32-0.34.

The positive correlation suggests that firms take into account several sources of risk when they form their supply chains, a feature that has been largely ignored by the literature (an exception is Kopytov et al.

(2024) who study how supply chains adapt to supplier volatility).2 While the comparative statics exercises provide stark analytical insights about the possible impacts of diversification, the effects of firm diversification in a realistic economy will, in general, depend on the variation in fundamentals and “standard” motives for trade, such as geography and productivity in addition to risk-mitigation incentives.

Our third contribution is, therefore, quantitative: we compute expected real wages, real wage volatility and welfare across districts in our calibrated model, given model-implied sourcing risk. Our framework implies that as a result of firm sourcing decisions, real wages in each district will depend on the geography, productivity, and climate risk of all districts. We perform several quantitative exercises in our calibrated model.

First, we validate the insight from our comparative statics exercises regarding wage volatility. We find that under the estimated trade costs and climate risk, the variance of real wages is 9.25% higher in autarky. Expected real wages are also higher in autarky. In our calibrated model, they are, on average, 3.1% higher, although for some districts expected real wages decline. With risk aversion in preferences, autarky is welfare reducing, with a 7.29% average welfare decline.

We then study how regional wages change in general equilibrium under alternative shock 2 In an alternative exercise, we parameterize the regional risk as a function of climate-related variables and other risk-related variables related to institutional quality and local development and estimate the relevant parameters. Our quantitative results remain very similar. 3 probabilities to capture scenarios of changing climate risk, and to highlight our new channel.

We use the correlation of flood, heat, dryness and precipitation risk with our estimated district-level risk probabilities to infer how these probabilities would change given IPCC projections of flood, heat, dryness and precipitation risk. We then compute expected real wages, input prices, and wage volatility under the scenario of climate increasing as projected. We find that the average risk of districts increases by 1.1p.p., but there is wide heterogeneity.

Expected real wages decline on average by 1.96%, their volatility increases slightly by an average of 0.15%. Welfare decreases on average by 2.01%. Around 37% of districts see expected real wage increases, however. Our quantification highlights the distributional consequences of adaptation to climate risk. In the counterfactual, initially better-off districts largely see welfare increases, while initially worse-off districts see welfare declines.

Regions where risk is increasing bear the direct effects of shocks, but additionally see downward pressure on wages due to firm adaptation away from them. In an additional counterfactual, we study the distributional implications of myopia about climate risk changing, and show that for some regions, especially those who are experiencing an increase in risk, adaptation is welfare decreasing.

In sum, our model and quantification show that firm sourcing decisions help mitigate the effects of climate shocks and have quantitatively important implications in general equilibrium for real wages in safer regions relative to riskier ones. Our results highlight two economic implications of climate change. On the positive side, the risks of climate change are partially mitigated as firms anticipate climate risk and diversify their sourcing decisions.

This implies that more volatile weather does not necessarily translate into higher aggregate output volatility. On the negative side, climate change will have even larger redistributive effects across regions than commonly believed. Regions with more climate risk will face the direct effects of the shocks themselves, but additionally will also become less appealing to other regions as a source of inputs. As a result, demand for products from these regions will decline, and real wages will fall.

The converse will occur in “safer” regions. In other words, diversification will amplify the distributional effects of climate change. Related literature. A growing literature studies how climate change shapes economic activity.

Several papers focus on the long run, assessing how the distribution of economic activity changes within and across regions, and countries (Bilal and Rossi-Hansberg, 2023; Cruz and Rossi-Hansberg, 2023; Desmet et al., 2021; Farrokhi and Lashkaripour, 2024; Hsiao, 2023; Jia et al., 2022; Nath, 2024). A smaller subset considers optimal mediumterm policy responses (Balboni, 2024).

Another branch of the literature studies the effects of extreme weather events on firms’ employment and location decisions as well as on FDI 4 (Castro-Vincenzi, 2024; Gu and Hale, 2023; Indaco et al., 2020; Pankratz and Schiller, 2024). In this paper, we study the general equilibrium impacts of endogenous firm supply network decisions under climate risk.

While we emphasize how firms can use their supply networks to mitigate the risk of extreme weather events, our model is well suited to analyze the general equilibrium effects of supply network formation under any locationspecific risk. Our theoretical and quantitative results are related to the insights in Kopytov et al.

(2024), who study supply chain adaptation to supplier volatility, and to Pellet and TahbazSalehi (2023), who study the implications of rigidities in supply chains that arise due to incomplete information. Similar to the rigid inputs in Pellet and Tahbaz-Salehi (2023), firms in our model place orders for intermediate inputs prior to shock realization, and cannot adjust orders ex-post.

In contrast to these papers, our model features households in multiple regions who cannot trade shares of the different firms, and the incentive to mitigate volatility arises from the concavity of firm profits. As a result, in our framework, aggregate volatility decreases in trade openness, as firms mitigate risk, reminiscent of the findings in Caselli et al. (2019). However, expected real wages can be lower under costly trade compared to autarky.

This parallels the results in these papers that aggregate output is also lower due to diversification away from volatile suppliers. We show, however, that eliminating trade barriers permits both expected real wages to be higher and aggregate volatility to be lower, maximizing the benefits of diversification. At the micro level, our firm problem is similar to Blaum et al.

(2024), but our model delivers strong implications for how wages across space are shaped by regional risk in general equilibrium, and can be used to infer the risk that firms assign to different sourcing locations. Supply chain fragility and resilience have received increased attention in the literature following the Covid-19 pandemic (Goldberg and Reed, 2023; Grossman et al., 2023, 2024; Khanna et al., 2022), and recent global disruptions (Korovkin et al., 2024).

Our firmto-firm data are similar to Khanna et al. (2022), but our identification strategy uses extreme weather events, and we emphasize the adaptation of supply chains to climate risk and the general equilibrium consequences, which are not studied in that paper. Our empirical evidence indeed suggests that firm supply chain responses to climate-related risk vary qualitatively and quantitatively from their responses to an unanticipated, temporary shock like Covid-19.

Additionally, we also build on a growing research agenda on how production networks respond to shocks. A long literature documents the importance of international trade in inputs and studies the macroeconomic consequences of such trade (Antràs et al., 2017; Caliendo and Parro, 2015; Hummels et al., 2001; Huo et al., 2024; Johnson and Noguera, 2012, 2017; Yi, 2003).

A strand of this literature has emphasized the transmission of nat5 ural disasters through trade and supply chain links (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Boehm et al., 2019; Carvalho et al., 2021). In contrast to studying the responses of firms or sectors to the incidence of shocks, we quantify the general equilibrium economy-wide consequences of firm supply chain adaption to the (changing) probability of disruptions. Finally, our paper contributes to research studying trade under risk (e.g.

Helpman and Razin (1978), Esposito (2022), Allen and Atkin (2022), Adamopoulos and Leibovici (2024), among others), albeit without an emphasis on supply chains and climate risk. While the responses of firm supply chains to climate risk have received little attention in the literature, closely related is ongoing work by Balboni et al. (2024) and Blaum et al. (2024), who study supply chain responses to floods in Pakistan, and US importer responses to shipping-time volatility, respectively.

These papers provide rich empirical evidence of varied aspects of firm responses to supply chain risk. Our empirical evidence is complementary, but our focus here is on the quantitative model studying the spatial general equilibrium implications of supply chain adaptation to climate risk. The rest of our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines our data and shows descriptive patterns. Section 3 sets up the model, derives some analytical results, and performs comparative statics.

Section 4 calibrates and quantifies the model, while 4.4 contains the climate change counterfactuals, and Section 5 concludes. 2 Empirical Approach 2.1 Data Firm-to-firm trade. Our primary data source is daily establishment-level transactions (while we use the term “firm”, the data are at the granular establishment level). These data are from the tax authority of a large Indian state with a fairly diversified production structure, roughly 50% urbanization, and high population density.

Comparing this context to others with firm-to-firm transaction data, we observe that the state has roughly three times Belgium’s population, seven times Costa Rica’s, and double Chile’s. The data contain daily transactions from April 2018 to October 2020 between all registered establishments within the state, and all transactions where one node of the transaction (either buyer or seller) is in the state.

All transactions have unique tax identifiers for both the selling and buying establishments, which include the value of the whole transaction, the value of the items being traded by 8-digit HSN code, the quantity of each item, its unit, and transportation mode. Each transaction also reports the zip code location of both the selling and buying establishments, which we merge with other geographic data.

By law, any goods transaction 6 with value over Rs.50,000 ($700) has to generate eway-bills, which populate our data. Transactions with values lower than $700 can also optionally be registered. As such, our network is representative of relatively larger firms, but the threshold is sufficiently low to capture small firms as well. More information is in Appendix A, with summary statistics in Table A1.

The distribution of customers and suppliers each firm has is very similar to that documented by Alfaro Ureña et al. (2018) for Costa Rica. We use the data to construct the buyer-supplier network every period and the total value of inputs purchased and output sold by firms. To obtain a measure of real inputs and output, we use the reported quantity of each transaction to calculate unit values for each product, construct a price index, and deflate firm-level input purchases and sales.

2.2 Descriptive Analysis To begin our analysis, we document three facts related to supplier diversification and climate risk to motivate the key features of our model. Fact 1: A significant mass of firms source the same product from multiple regions. We leverage the detailed product information in our transaction data and compute the number of districts a firm sources a given product from. As shown in Table 1 column 1, 62% of the firms in our data buy from more than one district.

The results are even starker when looking at total value transacted, where 96.5% of total purchases come from firms with more than one supplier-district. In columns 3 to 6, we show that a significant fraction of firms also multisource the same product across regions. We compute the number of districts a firm-by-HSN product code pair sources from. In Columns 3 and 4, we use 4-digit product codes; and in Column 5-6, 8-digit product codes.

Even with the narrowest product definition available in our data, 14.4% of firms source the same product from more than one district, and 74% of purchases come from firms that source the product from more than one district. This is evidence that a significant fraction of firms multisource their products.

In Appendix Table B1, we show that the distribution of the number of supplier districts is very similar when we exclude likely wholesalers and likely retailers from the analysis.3 Fact 2: Firms that multisource more, buy products from farther distances, dryer regions, and pay higher input prices.

Focusing on firm-product pairs at the 8-digit product level in Figure 1a, we show that firms that source the same product from more regions tend to buy from suppliers that 3 We also show in Table B2 that the results are consistent when looking at multisourcing across firms instead of supplier districts.

7 Table 1: Share of firms that source from multiple districts Number of supplier districts 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10+ Share of buyers Share of buyers x HSN-4 Share of buyers x HSN-8 Firms Value Firms Value Firms Value 37.9% 20.6% 12.2% 7.7% 5.3% 3.7% 2.7% 2.0% 1.5% 6.4% 3.5% 3.9% 8.4% 4.0% 3.7% 4.0% 3.5% 3.7% 3.2% 62.0% 77.1% 13.8% 4.5% 1.9% 1.0% 0.5% 0.3% 0.2% 0.1% 0.4% 13.1% 11.1% 13.7% 7.6% 6.8% 5.7% 4.0% 4.0% 3.4% 30.5% 85.6% 10.1% 2.5% 0.9% 0.4% 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.0% 0.1% 25.8% 16.4% 10.9% 9.2% 5.6% 4.1% 4.0% 2.6% 2.8% 18.6% Note.

Column 1 aggregates the data at the firm level and computes the share of firms that source from a certain number of districts. Column 2 calculates the fraction of total value purchased by number of supplier districts sourced from. Columns 3-4 aggregate the data at the firm-by-4-digit product level, and Columns 5-6 at the firm-by-8-digit product level. are farther away. For instance, firm-product pairs that source from one district have an average distance of 350km to suppliers.

On the other hand, firm-product pairs with five suppliers per product have an average distance of more than double, at 711km. In Figure 1b, we also show that firm-product pairs with more suppliers also seem to source from lower rainfall districts. For firm-product pairs that source from one district, such districts have, on average, a 6.5mm daily rainfall. On the other hand, for firmproduct pairs that source from five districts, such districts have, on average, 5.4mm of daily rainfall.

The 1.1mm difference in rainfall between one and five source districts, is 17% with respect to the mean. In Appendix Table B3, we show that such patterns are also prevalent for other measures of climate risk, such as historical riverine flooding.

Finally, in Figure 1c, we show that firms that source from more districts also tend to pay higher prices for their inputs.4 As shown in Figure 1c, firms that source from five districts pay an average price that is almost one standard deviation higher than firms that source from only one district. The average price paid monotonically increases with the number of districts sourced from.5 Fact 3: Supplier districts that face higher climate risk charge lower prices.

Figures 1b and 1c suggest that as buyers purchase from more suppliers, they source from 4 To compute average prices, we first estimate a regression of log price on product fixed effects, and standardize the residual of such regression to construct our residual price index. We then normalize the average price for those firms that source from only one region to one.

5 In Appendix Table B3, we show that these patterns are statistically significant, and remain so within product and controlling for buyer size and supplier size. In other words, the patterns are not driven by specific products, or by larger buyers, or by supplier capacity. 8 Figure 1: Supplier characteristics by number of districts sourced from (a) Distance to suppliers (b) Average rainfall (c) Average price of inputs Note.

In the left panel, we compute the average distance between the firm and each of its suppliers from our transaction data. We then compute the average distance across firm-product pairs sourcing from 1 to 5 districts. In the middle panel, for each firm-product pair, we compute the average daily rainfall at each of the districts the firm sources from. Daily rainfall comes from the India Meteorological Department. We then compute the average across all firm-product pairs sourcing from 1 to 5 districts.

In the right panel, we compute the average price paid for inputs for firm-product pairs sourcing from 1 to 5 districts. To construct our price index, we first run a regression of log prices on product fixed effects and take the residual. We standardize the residual and normalize it to 1 for firm-product pairs that source from only one district. regions with lower climate risk and pay higher prices. The flip side of this pattern is that suppliers in riskier areas might charge lower prices.

To investigate this relationship further, we estimate a regression at the buyer (j) - supplier district (d) - product (p) level as in equation 1. log(Price)j,d,p = α1 log(Climate risk)d + α2 log(Distance)j,d + α3 1(j in d)j,d + α4 1(j, d in same state)j,d + γXd,p + δj + δp + ϵj,d,p , (1) where log(Price)j,d,p is the log of the average price charged to buyer j for product p by suppliers in district d. We control for the distance between j and d, indicators on whether the buyer is in district d or the same state as district d, and a set of controls at the product-supplier district level (Xd,p ) such as the log size of all supplier sales from that district-product pair, and the log of the total sales from that district.

We also include buyer and product fixed effects, so the identification of the climate variables comes from firms that buy from multiple districts. Additionally, we include covariates that aim to capture market power at the supplier district, such as the log of the total number of suppliers for a given product in the district, and the log of the largest supplier market share for that product in the district.

We consider two climate risk measures: the average daily rainfall for each district in 2019 and the historical river flooding in each district. Details on how these climate variables 9 are computed can be found in Appendix B.2. As shown in Table 2, both climate measures are negatively correlated with prices. The magnitudes are robust to including additional controls at the supplier-district level.

A 10% increase in rainfall in a district, is associated with suppliers in those districts charging 0.11% lower prices. Similarly, a 10% increase in riverine flooding levels in a district is associated with 2.55% lower prices charged by suppliers in that district. While these results cannot be interpreted as causal, they are suggestive that riskier areas charge lower prices.

Table 2: Correlation between price and supplier district climate risk Log (Price)j,d,p Log (Price)j,d,p Log(Avg Rainfall)d -0.0179*** (0.005) -0.0112** (0.005) N obs Additional controls 991,802 No 991,802 Yes Log (Price)j,d,p Log (Price)j,d,p Log(Avg River Flooding)d -0.381*** (0.026) -0.255*** (0.026) N obs Additional controls 996,720 No 996,720 Yes Note. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. We run a cross-sectional regression at the firm (j), supplier district (d), 8-digit product (p) level.

The outcome is the log of the average price charged by suppliers in district d, to firm j for product p. The first and third columns control for log average distance between j and suppliers in d, a dummy variable for whether j is in district d, a dummy variable for whether j is in the same state as d, the log of total sales in product p from suppliers in d, the log of total sales of suppliers in d across all products, buyer fixed effects and product fixed effects.

Columns 2 and 4 include additional controls for the log number of suppliers for product p in d and the log market share of the highest supplier in product p. Climate variables used are average daily rainfall in district in 2019 (left panel) and historical riverine flooding levels in district (right panel). Fact 4: Purchases fall temporarily when suppliers are affected by floods.

Next, we leverage the timing of unexpected floods to examine how input purchases change in the lead-up to and right after the shock. Our event-study analysis examines pre-trends in the lead-up to the shock, and dynamics thereafter. The absence of pre-trends provides suggestive evidence that our parallel-trends identification assumption is likely to hold, whereas the post-shock dynamics are informative of how long it takes for firms to recover after the flood.

In Appendix B.1, we discuss the data on flood events in our sample. We use the existing supplier network (in the pre-shock period) as a measure of the exposure to the disruption, to study how buyers were affected when their suppliers were hit.

We examine outcomes yj,t,k,τ for firm j, in period t, and industry k, measured in event-time (since flood) τ using the specification: yj,t,k,τ = x=+5 X [γx (Flood Exposure)jτ + δτ,x + βx Xj,τ0 −1 ] + δj + δr,k,t + ϵj,t,k,τ (2) x=−5 We estimate two specifications. First, when studying the direct impacts on suppliers in flooded areas, “Flood Exposurejτ ” takes a value of 1 if firm j was exposed to a particular flood.

Then, when examining how downstream buyers are affected, “Flood Exposurejτ ” is 10 “Supplier Exposurejτ ”, which captures how exposed its suppliers were to the flood: (Supplier Exposure)jτ = N X si,j,τ,x<0 × 1 (Supplier i exposed to flood in τ ) , i where si,j,τ,x<0 is the value of purchases that firm j buys from firm i, relative to firm j’s total purchases, over the five months before the flood. The index essentially calculates the weighted average of the flood exposure of firm j’s sellers.

A higher value of the index implies firm j faces a higher “supplier-exposure,” as a larger share of its purchases were coming from firms exposed to the flood. We include a wide range of high-dimensional fixed effects to account for confounding shocks.

These include firm fixed effects δj that control for firm-specific time-invariant differences; industry-by-time fixed effects δr,k,t that control for district-industry-specific shocks;6 and flood event-time since flood fixed effects δτ,x that control for aggregate trends around the flood event that affect all firms (including those not in the flood-exposed areas).

We also control for firm size-specific shocks, by controlling for purchases in the pre-period Xj,τ0 −1 , interacted with time-since flood indicators. Figure 2a plots impacts on suppliers, and shows a lack of meaningful pre-trends in the lead-up to the flood. After the flood, there is an immediate decline in sales of 0.10 log points, which worsens until two months after the flood. After the two-month slump, there is a quick recovery to what they were in the pre-period.

Figure 2: Effects of Floods on Sales and Purchases (a) Sales of affected suppliers (b) Downstream purchases (c) Existing vs new suppliers Note. Figure 2a includes event-time, industry-time, and firm fixed effects, and controls for pre-period firm sales interacted with time indicators. Figure 2b and 2c include firm, time, event-time, and industrydistrict-real time fixed effects, and demand controls and log pre-period purchases-time controls. Standard errors clustered at the district level.

Figure 2b plots effects on purchases of downstream firms. Once again, the coefficients in the pre-periods do not display any meaningful trends. Consistent with Figure 2a, we find that purchases decline sharply for the first few months, and then start to recover. Purchases are the lowest at two months after the flood, dropping by 0.07 log points with 6 When studying the direct impacts on suppliers, we include industry-time fixed effects δk,t instead, as the flood varies at the district-time level.

11 respect to the baseline period, for every one standard deviation increase in the supplier exposure (SD of exposure is 0.1). As we describe in our calibration section, we use this estimate to choose the input disruption parameter χj to match the drop. Interestingly, Figure 2c shows that affected firms do not systematically switch to new suppliers following the realization of a disruption.

Rather, they return to existing suppliers, which is additional evidence supporting the view that firms are adapting to the probability of climate-related disruptions ex-ante.7 Appendix B.1.2 examines a wider range of outcomes and methods. It shows these patterns are similar if we use insights from recent advances in two-way fixed effects methods, and estimate Local Projections-Diff-in-Diff (LP-DID) specifications as well as using a binary treatment.

The appendix also illustrates responses of other outcomes, such as downstream sales and prices.8 Finally, in Appendix C.5 we examine the importance of inventories in our empirical analysis. We find that inventories are, on average, less than a month’s sales, and are not correlated with multisourcing behavior. 3 Model This section develops a spatial general equilibrium model of firm sourcing under risk and performs comparative statics. Section 4 calibrates and quantifies the model.

The model is static, as the rich geographic variation and a large number of locations is necessary for illustrating the diversification mechanism.9 3.1 Setting The economy consists of I regions. Each region i is endowed with Li workers, a unit continuum of final goods producers who produce nontraded final goods, and competitive intermediate goods producers.

7 These patterns are consistent with evidence from the same context showing how buyer-supplier relationships are personalized as relationship-capital is important (Cevallos Fujiy et al., 2023), and so firms are unlikely to switch suppliers in the face of temporary shocks (Cevallos Fujiy et al., 2021). 8 We find that downstream sales decrease by 7% in the three months after the shock for exposed firms relative to non-exposed firms while total purchases decrease by 16%.

This implies that for every 1% decrease in purchases, sales decrease by 0.43%. Using a back-of-the-envelope calculation, our model predicts that for every 1% decrease in purchases, sales decrease by 0.54%. Our quantitative model in Section 4 matches this pattern. 9 The event studies illustrated (short-lived) dynamic responses to shock incidence. However, a dynamic model with sufficiently rich geographic/locational variation is not currently tractable.

Our emphasis is on understanding the steady state general equilibrium consequences of a distribution of risk across space, not on the reaction to the incidence of a disruption. That said, our model can be used to study the immediate ex-post response to the incidence of a disruption, as we do in Section 4.4. Given the short-lived responses in the data, we would not expect a significant role for additional dynamics here. 12 Timing. The model is static and consists of two stages.

In the first stage, final goods producers in each location i place their orders for intermediate inputs from location j, Mji . In the second stage, inputs are produced, origin-specific sourcing disruption shocks, χ = {χj }, j ∈ I are realized, and then inputs are delivered, final goods firms choose their labor inputs and produce, households supply labor and consume, and all markets clear at equilibrium prices. Households.

The representative household in region i supplies labor Li inelastically to firms in i and chooses a consumption aggregate of the non-traded regional final goods, qi (χ), to maximize Z max log qi (ω,χ) qi (ω, χ) σ−1 σ ! σ  σ−1 dω (3) ω∈[0,1] subject to the budget constraint, Z pi (ω, χ)qi (ω, χ) = Yi (χ) ≡ wi (χ)Li + Πi (χ) ∀χ ∈ G(χ), (4) ω∈[0,1] where pi (ω, χ) is the price of final good qi (ω, χ), Yi (χ) is total income in region i and σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution.

Total income Yi (χ) is composed of labor income, wi (χ)Li , and aggregate profits rebated to the household by the firms, Πi (χ). Our baseline model assumes labor is immobile across regions. 1 The Lagrange multipliers λi (χ) = Yi (χ) of the state-specific budget constraints measure how much an extra unit of income contributes to utility in different states of the world. These multipliers define the stochastic discount factor firms use to compare profits across different states of the world.

Intermediate goods producers. In each region, there are a continuum of competitive suppliers of tradable intermediate inputs, M̄i , with production function M̄i = zi ℓM i , where zi is their productivity and ℓM i is the labor used in the production of intermediates. The wi (χ) price of intermediates in i is equal to their constant marginal cost, pM i (χ) = zi , where wi (χ) corresponds to the wages in that region.

Notice that intermediates M̄i are produced before the realization of shocks, but their price is potentially stochastic. Let pM ji (χ) denote the price of intermediates from j used in i. We assume iceberg trade costs τji between regions. No arbitrage in shipping implies that the factory-gate price and M the price at the time of intermediate usage are related by: pM ji (χ) = τji pj (χ). 13 Final goods firms.

Each region i contains a unit continuum of homogeneous final goods producers that produce differentiated varieties ω. Final goods are not tradable across regions. The constant returns to scale production function of the firms is qi (ω, χ) = ϕi ℓi (ω, χ)β xi (ω, χ)1−β , (5) where ϕi is the productivity of final goods’ producers in location i, ℓi (ω, χ) is the firm’s labor input, and intermediates, xi (ω, χ), can be sourced from each region j ∈ I as perfect substitutes:10 xi (ω, χ) = X xji (ω, χ) .

(6) j∈I For compact notation, for the remainder of the paper we suppress the explicit dependence of variables on χ except where necessary for expositional clarity. Note that all equilibrium variables except M̄i remain potentially stochastic. Second stage. In the second stage, final goods firms have already placed their orders of intermediates Mji (ω), shocks χ have been realized, and production takes place.

The profit maximization problem of a final goods firm in i in the second stage is max qi ,{xji }Ij=1 ,ℓi such that  σ−1  σ1 σ−1 qi (ω) σ − wi ℓi (ω) Y i Pi xi (ω) = X xji (ω) (7) (8) j∈I xji (ω) ≤ χj Mji (ω) ∀j, (9) and the production function (5). Here, Yi is income, and Pi is the price index in region i. χj ≤ 1, j ∈ I are the shock realizations.

We assume the shocks destroy some of the orders of inputs, Mji , that have been placed in the region in the first stage, and so if a shock materializes, the firm receives fewer inputs than its order. This captures the notion that risk is associated with a disruption of the quantity of inputs that arrive for production for reasons that can include climate-associated shocks such as rainfall or floods, and we will calibrate the shock size to match our event study estimates in Section 2.2.

We assume the stochastic shocks are origin-specific, and so they affect orders of inputs from all buying regions. As the shocks are not idiosyncratic, they will potentially affect aggregate outcomes. 10 Alternatively, we could also use an aggregator of K varieties of inputs, where inputs of the different regions are perfect substitutes within a variety. For simplicity, our baseline model uses a single “variety” of input that can be sourced from multiple regions.

Appendix E.2 considers a CES aggregate of inputs. 14 Note that as second-stage profits (7) are monotonically increasing in input usage xi (ω), the firm will always optimally use all available inputs that are delivered of its orders Mji (ω). In other words, Equation (9) will always hold with equality.

The first order conditions of the firm’s second stage problem (7) pin down a firm’s optimal choices of labor li , as well as its price pi , quantity qi , and profits πi as a function of the vectors of first stage orders Mi = {Mji }Ij=1 and origin-specific shocks, χ = {χj }Ij=1 .

In particular, the expression of profits for a firm in region i, suppressing the variety index ω for concise exposition, is:  πi (Mi ; χ) = σ(1 − β) + β β(σ − 1)  β(σ − 1) σ 1  (1−β)(σ−1)  β+σ(1−β)  σ−1 X   σ−1 ϕi  χj Mji  .  Yi Pi   σ  β+σ(1−β) β(1−σ) β+σ(1−β) wi j∈I (10) First stage. In the first stage, prior to the realization of shocks, final goods producers in all locations choose their orders Mji of inputs to maximize expected profits.

Firms have rational expectations and make their input sourcing decisions based on the true joint distribution of origin-specific disruption shocks, G(χ).11 The firm’s problem in stage one is " !# X pM max Eχ λi πi (Mi ; χ) − , (11) ji Mji Mi ≥0 j∈I where pM ji is the order cost of inputs from j in i, and πi (Mi ; χ) is as in Equation 10.

The first order conditions of this problem are   Eχ λi χj Θi −1 # β+σ(1−β) " X   ≤ 0 ∀ j , − pM ji χj Mji (12) j∈I ih i σ h β(1−σ) 1  σ−1  σ−1  β+σ(1−β) β(σ−1) β+σ(1−β) β+σ(1−β) w Y i Pi ϕi is a function of equiwhere Θi = (1−β) i β σ librium aggregates that are potentially stochastic, as Yi , wi , and Pi might depend on the shock realizations across regions.

These first order conditions highlight that when placing an order for intermediate inputs of a given origin j, firms equate expected marginal benefits and marginal costs. Moreover, 11 In our empirical implementation of the model, we assume that these shocks are binary, occurring with probability ρi in each location i. In our quantification of the model we permit spatially-correlated shocks. Note that we impose rational expectations.

This is only necessary for our solution approach, the model can accommodate alternative belief structures. 15 this optimality condition elucidates under which circumstances the firm does not source from a particular location. This occurs if the expected marginal benefit from placing an infinitesimal order in location j, with optimal orders elsewhere, is strictly smaller than its expected price, pM ji (χ). Proposition 1 Ex-ante profits are concave in orders of inputs Mji . Proof.

See Appendix C. This property of the firm’s problem is important for the firm’s optimal sourcing strategy. Interestingly, it implies that the firms behave as if they are risk averse, even without explicit risk aversion in managerial preferences, when placing their inputs orders to maximize expected profits. As a result, the “risk-aversion” from the concavity in profits implies firms will optimally diversify sourcing locations.

Appendix E.2 shows that the concavity of firm profits continues to hold with a CES aggregator of inputs from different origins.12 3.2 General Equilibrium In the second stage, shocks are realized, inputs are delivered across regions, and all goods and labor markets clear.

The labor market clearing condition for each region i is σ  β+σ(1−β)  1−β  σ−1 σ X  β(σ − 1) 1    σ1    = , Yi Pσ−1 χj Mij   ϕi   i   σ wi  M̄i Li − z | {z i}  (13) j∈I L̃i , Final goods labor i where L̃i is the labor used in the production of final goods in i, and M̄ is the labor used zi PJ in the production of M̄i = j=1 τij Mij intermediates to ship to all regions j ∈ I from region i.

Goods markets clear in each region, implying that the region’s income is equal to its expenditure Yi = wi Li + Π̂i , (14) where Π̂i are the aggregate profits in i of the final goods firms as in Equation (7) less 12 With a finite elasticity of substitution, firms would choose to source from all locations, inconsistent with the data on sourcing shares. Here, the diversification motive would imply they source more at the intensive margin from each region.

While our assumption of perfect substitutes in the input bundle is analytically convenient, estimates of input substitution elasticities are often low. With a low substitution elasticity, the CES aggregator features “dislike-for-variety.” Allowing for an extensive margin of choosing the number of sourcing locations would imply that firms in a low-elasticity world would choose few sourcing locations. Observed multisourcing would then be driven by the diversification motive.

16 their intermediate goods order costs Z Π̂i = πi (ω)dω − Z X pM ij Mij (ω)dω. (15) j Notice that we assume firms pay for their orders of intermediate inputs, not for the fraction they receive after the shock. Additionally, Equation (13) implies that the full quantity of intermediates ordered in stage 1 is produced. This implies that the shocks “destroy” a fraction of produced inputs.13 The equilibrium of the economy is formally defined in Appendix C.1. Features of the equilibrium.

As all firms in a region are homogeneous, under the unit mass of firms assumption, the regional price index Pi = pi , and aggregate profits Π̂i = π̂i . We can then characterize several features of the equilibrium. 1 Lemma 1 Aggregate profits are a constant fraction of labor income Π̂i = σ−1 wi Li . Further, aggregate expenditure on materials in i is given by X pM ij Mij = (1 − β)wi Li , (16) j and aggregate income in location i is given by, Yi = σ wi Li . σ−1 (17) Proof. See Appendix C.2.

Lemma 2 The aggregate labor demand of final goods producers is inelastic, independent of the realization of shocks, χ, and is a constant share of the aggregate labor endowment, L̃i = βLi . (18) Proof. See Appendix C.2. To understand the intuition behind Lemma 2, consider the case of firms in a region facing negative shocks in its sourcing locations at the start of stage 2. Due to input disruptions, all else equal, the demand of final goods producers for labor will decline.

However, in 13 We do not observe actual contracts between firms in the data, so we have to make an assumption regarding what fraction of the orders of inputs are paid for. Our setup would remain tractable under alternative assumptions, e.g. only a fraction of the order is paid for upfront.

While that would change the input costs entering Equation (11), it would not change the concavity of first stage profits in order costs, which is the key mechanism for firm input diversification in this framework. 17 equilibrium, this decline is exactly offset by the increase in final goods prices and decline in the real wage, as aggregate consumer demand is downward sloping. The net effect is that the aggregate labor demand from final goods producers remains unaffected.

Equation (18) has strong implications for equilibrium wages. In particular, equilibrium wages must be such that the remaining workers are used by the intermediate inputs sector in stage 1. This implies that equilibrium wages wi and input prices pM i are such that stage 1 firm input orders demand (1 − β)Li to produce M̄i so that labor markets clear. Lemma 3 Let labor in region 1 be the numeraire. Equilibrium relative wages wi are deterministic.

This, in turn, implies that aggregate income in location i is also deterministic. Proof. See Appendix C.2. Lemma 3 follows immediately from the discussion above. There is a unique wage wi in each location such that equilibrium input orders use the labor not used in final goods production in stage 2. This simplifies the analysis substantially: while wages could potentially vary across states of the world, by Lemmas 1-3, wages, input prices, nominal income and profits are deterministic.

The only aggregate variable that is stochastic, varying with the realization of shocks, is the ideal price index, Pi In the ex-post general equilibrium, the expression for Θi which is part of the marginal contribution to profits of a marginal unit of Mji (Equation 7) is given by the following expression: !− (1−β)(σ−1) β+σ(1−β) Θi = (1 − β)wi Li X χj Mji . j∈I This implies that Θi is stochastic from the perspective of firms in stage 1.

Ex-Ante General Equilibrium As pointed out above, the vector of relative wages is deterministic and determined at the first stage, and intermediate goods producers employ (1 − β)Li workers in input production. In turn, due to the linear technology assumption, it must be the case that in equilibrium, the production of intermediates in each location is equal to M̄i = (1 − β)zi Li .

In the equilibrium of this economy, the vector of wages, {wi }Ii=1 , must be such that total demand from intermediate goods producers in each region exactly equals this amount.

From the trade balance and the optimal total intermediate-expenditure conditions, we de- 18 rive the following equilibrium system, which generates the equilibrium vector of wages, wj Lj = X wi Li sji ({wi }Ii=1 ) i ; wj τji Mji ({wi }Ii=1 ) zj I sji ({wi }i=1 ) = P w τ I ℓ ℓi ℓ zj Mℓi ({wi }i=1 ) ∀ j ∈ I, n oI where crucially, the matrix of sourcing shares defined by sji ({wi }Ii=1 ) is a function i=1,j=1 of the vector of wages, the parameters of the model and the probability distribution of the shocks.14 This completes the description of the economy.

Welfare Agents’ welfare is given by their expected consumption, which, is equal to the output of the final goods’ producers and varies by region. In general equilibrium, the aggregate output of the final sector in region i, conditional on the available inputs, is given by !1−β X χj Mji Qi (Mi ; χ) = ϕi β β Lβi , j and expected welfare becomes " Wi = Eχ [log Qi (Mi ; χ)] = log ϕi + β log β + β log Li + Eχ (1 − β) log !# X χj Mji .

j (19) As is clear from this welfare expression, since consumers are risk averse under log utility, the sourcing strategy selected by the final goods producers has effects on their welfare. Consumers also benefit from diversification in firms’ sourcing strategies.15 3.3 A Two Location Example To gain intuition, consider a simple case with two locations.

Region 1 is risky and receives a shock χ1 < 1, with probability ρ, and region 2 is a safe location.16 Additionally, there are no trade costs, and therefore, the optimal intermediate bundle chosen by firms is the same in both locations.

M Notice that in equilibrium it must be that pM 1 < p2 , because otherwise, the safe location’s input is unambiguously better than the input from the risky location, and the labor market 14 Similar non-linear systems of equations in wages appear in several static trade models. Note that here, the system includes orders of intermediates, Mji , which are also equilibrium objects and do not have a closed-form solution.

15 While consumers unambiguously gain from diversification and trade with our assumption of log utility, under a linear utility index of standard CES preferences (risk-neutral consumers), consumers value diversification less than firms. In that case, there can be losses from trade when trade costs are high. We discuss this case in Appendix C.3 16 That is, E1χ = ρχ1 + (1 − ρ) and E2χ = 1.

19 will not clear in the risky location.17 The optimal stage 1 sourcing choices of firms for firms from both regions i ∈ 1, 2 is −1 −1 −1 β+σ(1−β) −1 β+σ(1−β) S NS M1i : ρχ1 λSi ΘSi [χ1 M1i + M2i ] β+σ(1−β) + (1 − ρ)λN [M1i + M2i ] β+σ(1−β) = pM i Θi 1 M2i : ρλSi ΘSi [χ1 M1i + M2i ] S NS + (1 − ρ)λN [M1i + M2i ] i Θi (1−β)(σ−1) = pM 2 , (20) (21) (1−β)(σ−1) S Yi (χ1 M1i + M2i )− β+σ(1−β) and ΘN = (1−β)(σ−1) Yi (M1i + M2i )− β+σ(1−β) .

where ΘSi = (1−β)(σ−1) i σ σ As discussed above, Θi is stochastic, and depends on whether or not the shock materializes in region 1. Under the monopolistic competition assumption, all firms take these aggregates as given. Entering these shifters into the first order conditions of the firms, we can solve for optimal orders as a function of wages:   ρ (1 − β)(σ − 1) 1−ρ − M M1i = Yi M σ p 1 − χ 1 pM p2 − pM 2 1   (1 − β)(σ − 1) ρ (1 − ρ)χ1 M2i = Yi M − M .

σ p 2 − pM p1 − χ1 pM 1 2 (22) (23) Let wages in the less risky region 2 be the numeraire. As intermediates are priced at marginal cost and from the labor market clearing condition (Equation 13), a constant fraction of labor is used in the production of intermediates, we can show that equilibrium wages in the risky region 1 are given by w1 = z1 z1 L1 χ1 + z2 L2 (1 − ρ(1 − χ1 )) .

z2 z1 L1 (ρ + χ1 (1 − ρ)) + z2 L2 (24) Equation 24 shows that the nominal wage in the risky location relative to the safe one is a function of relative productivities, relative sizes, and the probability and magnitude of the shock. This wage is increasing in relative productivity and decreasing in relative population of location 1, and particularly relevant to our application, decreasing in both the probability and the magnitude of the sourcing disruption.

3.4 Comparative Statics For a larger number of regions, the model does not have an analytical solution. Prior to a full calibration to districts in India in Section 4.2, we first illustrate the model’s properties in a stylized 3-region setting.

To narrow the focus to the role of varied risk across space in firm sourcing decisions, 17 The fact that in this simple case, we have an interior solution for firms in both locations does not need to hold in general when there are multiple locations and trade costs. 20 we assume the regions are homogeneous in the productivity of their firms ϕi , their labor endowment Li , and the productivity of their intermediate goods producers, zi .

Trade is costly between regions and increasing in distance with elasticity of 0.5. We assume that if a shock occurs, 90% of the inputs ordered are destroyed (χ = 0.1). We consider two situations to illustrate separately the roles of geography and spatial variation in risk. First, we look into the case where the three locations are equidistant P from each other, but risk varies across space. Here we assume I1 3i=1 ρi = 0.5.

Second, we allow for regions to vary in their distance to each other, placing them on a straight line, but risk is constant across space (ρi = 0.5 for all i). In both cases, we contrast outcomes with regional autarky, where trade costs are infinity. In Appendix C.4, we consider other experiments for both geographies and risk profiles, including “no risk” (ρi = 0 for all regions), and free trade, where trade costs are set to 0 across regions. Homogeneous risk, heterogeneous distance.

Figure 3 illustrates the bilateral sourcing shares when the risk of shocks in each region is ρ = 0.5. Firms now face a trade-off: as shocks are independent across regions, they can reduce the probability of input disruptions by sourcing from multiple regions. On the other hand, sourcing from other regions is costly, given trade costs.

As a result, firms still largely source inputs from their own regions, but also diversify by sourcing some inputs from geographically closer regions where trade costs are lower. The figure illustrates that this higher demand for inputs from more central regions in equilibrium results in higher expected real wages in these regions. These more central regions also diversify their risk the most by participating in interregional sourcing.

Note that the expected price index in more central regions is, therefore, lower in equilibrium, as firms from these regions pay less in trade costs for inputs and better diversify risk. Heterogeneous risk, homogeneous distance. The left panel of Figure 4 illustrates the regional maps and the shock probabilities of each region in the heterogeneous risk case. Regions are equidistant in this setting, so geography does not play a role in diversification.

The middle panel shows the bilateral sourcing shares between regions. The diagonal is again the darkest: in the presence of trade costs, all regions source most of their inputs from their own region despite heterogeneous risk. However, there is clear variation. Regions 1 and 3 (the safest regions), see the most “own sourcing.” The riskiest region 2 diversifies the most. All regions source inputs from other regions, with relatively larger shares from those with low risk.

The right panel shows that expected real wages across regions are negatively correlated 21 Figure 3: Scenario with homogeneous risk, heterogeneous distance (a) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (b) Real Wages Note. The figures in the left panel consist of a 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are on the vertical axis, and the supplying regions are on the horizontal axis. Each line represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying region from each supplying region (column).

The figures in the right panel presents the real wages for each region, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space. The regions are in a straight line, such that the regions have different distances between each other. The scales are shown to the right of each figure. with the risk of shocks, and are highest in safest location despite identical regional fundamentals.

The underlying mechanisms at work are that safer regions experience higher labor demand for their intermediate inputs from all regions, pushing up nominal wages. They also face a lower price index of their final goods, as they can source safer “domestic” inputs without paying trade costs. Notice that in general equilibrium, the wage impacts on riskier regions will modulate sourcing from them.

Figure 4: Scenario with heterogeneous risk, homogeneous distance Different distance between regions (a) Shock Probabilities (b) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (c) Real Wages Note. The figures in the left panel show the probability that each region is hit by a shock, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space.

The figures in the middle panel consist of a 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are on the vertical axis, and the supplying regions are on the horizontal axis. Each line represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying region from each supplying region. The right panel presents the real wages for each region. Regions are equidistant from each other. The scales are shown to the right of each figure.

Importantly, under our assumption that inputs are perfect substitutes, and that regions have identical fundamentals, there is no source of traditional gains from trade either through comparative advantage or increasing varieties. The incentives for trade here 22 arise entirely to mitigate risk, with strong spatial general equilibrium implications for wages and prices. Heterogeneous risk and autarky.

To understand the equilibrium implications of diversification to mitigate risk, we maintain heterogeneous risk across regions but raise trade costs to infinity, shutting down inter-regional input sourcing. Appendix figure C6 illustrates that in regional autarky, the riskiest region sees the lowest expected real wages, while the safest regions see the highest expected real wages. These regions have the lowest expected prices due to the lowest shock probabilities and fully domestic sourcing.

Appendix C.4 shows that the expected real wage patterns are similar for with heterogeneous distance, as with autarky, regional geography has no impact on regional outcomes. We next consider how expected real wages change across regions moving from costly trade to autarky in Panel A, Figure 5. Interestingly, all regions see a decline in expected real wages moving to trade from autarky.

The intuition is that in this setting, there are no “conventional” gains from trade, as there is no comparative advantage or gains from variety. The primary reason for trade here is for risk diversification. However, trade is costly, so the benefits of diversification are obtained at a higher average input price, raising regional price indices and lowering expected real wages under costly trade. The largest decline in real wages is for the high-risk region 2.

It also has the lowest expected real wages in both the costly trade scenario and autarky scenarios. Importantly, lower expected real wages under costly trade do not imply welfare losses from trade. Panel B of the figure illustrates that there is a large decline in the volatility of real wages under trade, for all regions. Supply chain diversification lowers the variance in final goods prices across all regions, insuring against shocks and real wage volatility.

The riskiest region 2 sees the smallest increase in the variance of expected real wages when trade is barred, as its large own sourcing share in trade implies its variance is higher in both the trade and autarky scenarios. Household welfare is their expected log quantity of the final goods bundle consumed (Equation 19).

As a result, the decline in variance of real wages contributes positively to their welfare, offsetting the decline in expected real wages, and trade is welfare improving.18 Appendix Figure C7 shows the same insight holds with heterogeneous distance: regional geography primarily modulates sourcing patterns via trade, but does not otherwise play a role in the mechanisms underlying the relative decline in real wages (given the disruption probabilities and trade costs), and increase in their variance moving from costly trade to 18 Recall, E[log X] ≈ log E[X] − cV[X].

This result depends on the assumption of log utility. Appendix C.3 illustrates that under CES utility, trade at high trade costs can be Pareto-inferior relative to autarky as the decreased volatility of expected real wages does not compensate for the decrease in expected output with non-log preferences. 23 autarky. Appendix C.4 shows other comparative statics, including cases of no risk and free trade.

Figure 5: Comparison between heterogeneous risk under costly trade and autarky Different distance between regions (a) Expected Real Wages Ratio (b) Variance of Real Wages Ratio Note. In this figure we plot the expected real wages (left panel) and variance of real wages (right panel) for the scenario with heterogeneous risk and costly trade shown in Figure 4 relative to the scenario with heterogeneous risk and autarky shown in Figure C6.

The variance of real wages is computed across potential states of the world. Here, regions are are equidistant from each other. The scales are shown to the right of each figure. 4 Quantification 4.1 Solution Approach The solution to the quantitative model introduced in Section 3 requires overcoming three computational challenges.

First, the perfect substitutability across intermediate inputs from different origins, combined with the existence of trade costs, implies that the solution to the firms’ sourcing problem may not necessarily be interior; that is, firms in some regions might find it optimal not to source intermediates from certain origins.

Second, finding the solution to the firms’ optimal sourcing problem involves computing a high-dimensional expectation over 2I states of the world.19 Third, the two challenges mentioned above are compounded by the need to find the equilibrium of the model, which essentially surmounts to finding the vector of wages for which all markets clear. Given a vector of wages, {wi }Ii=1 , and shock probabilities, {ρi }Ii=1 , we leverage the structure of the model to solve it efficiently.

The first property of the problem described in Equation 11 is that the objective function is concave, and that the constraints are linear. Thus, any locally optimal point is also globally optimal, i.e., the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker 19 There are more than 600 districts in India, but we group small contiguous districts to create 271 regions. We implement our model for the 271 regions, so that involves computing expectations over 2271 ≈ 1082 states of the world.

24 (KKT) conditions are both necessary and sufficient for global optimality. These allow us to solve the firm’s problem by combining the stationarity and complementary slackness conditions to find that at the optimum, the following condition holds with equality:  E χi Θj  −1 # β+σ(1−β)  Mij = wi τij Mij ∀ i ∈ I, χi Mij zi i=1 " I X which results from multiplying the first order condition in Equation 12 by Mij .

We then substitute for the general equilibrium object, Θj , to derive the following expression:  I X (1 − β)wj Lj Mij E χi !−1  χi Mij i=1  = wi τij Mij ∀ i ∈ I. zi This system of I equations in I unknowns defines a nonlinear complementarity problem for which efficient numerical optimization routines exist.20 Finally, we approximate the high-dimensional expectation by using simulations, effectively solving the following system of equations for each region:21 (1 − β)wj Lj Mij S 1X S s=1  χi(s) I X !−1  (s) χi Mij i=1  = wi τij Mij ∀ i ∈ I. zi The procedure described above yields a solution to the firms’ sourcing problem given a vector of wages, {wi }Ii=1 .

To find the equilibrium wages, we manipulate the trade balance and the optimal total intermediates expenditure conditions to derive the following equilibrium system, wj Lj = X i wi Li sji ({wi }Ii=1 ) ; wj τji Mji ({wi }Ii=1 ) zj I sji ({wi }i=1 ) = P w τ I k ki k zk Mki ({wi }i=1 ) n oI where, the matrix of sourcing shares defined by sji ({wi }Ii=1 ) ∀ j ∈ I, is a function of the i=1,j=1 vector of wages and the parameters of the model.

The solution to the system of equilibrium conditions above finds the equilibrium wages conditional on a vector of probabilities, {ρi }Ii=1 . We describe how we calibrate these probabilities in the next subsection. 20 We solve this problem using the optimizer PATH implemented on Julia through the optimization modeling language JuMP (see, respectively, Ferris and Munson 1999, Bezanson et al. 2017 and Lubin et al. 2023).

21 In our estimation procedure and in the computation of counterfactuals, we use 10000 simulations. 25 4.2 Calibration We group the 600 districts in India into 271 regions by grouping contiguous low-population districts.22 We calibrate our model to these 271 regions. To calibrate the model for India as a whole, we complement our transaction data with the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), which is a nationally representative survey of manufacturing plants in India with more than ten employees.

We primarily use the wave of 2006-7 since it is the latest year for which the ASI has publicly available district identifiers. We need to calibrate the following parameters and moments: the demand elasticity (σ), labor endowments by district (Li ), regional productivities (ϕi ), the labor share in the production function (β), iceberg trade costs (τij ), the input disruption due to the shock (χj ) and flood probabilities (ρi ). First, we set the demand elasticity σ = 2 following Boehm et al. (2023).

Second, we use the ASI to obtain employment by district, which is our labor endowment, Li . We use the documented evidence in Fact 4 in Section 2.2 to choose the input disruption parameter χj , and match the drop in buyer purchases from the event study.

This generates a response to the incidence of a disruption within our model that matches the drop estimated in Fact 4.23 Productivities To estimate productivities by district, ϕi , and the labor share β, we follow the literature on production function estimation and use the Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) approach (henceforth ACF).24 We use revenues as the dependent variable and labor, materials, and capital as production function inputs.

We implement ACF to estimate the production function parameters and the productivities.25 Panel A of Figure 6 illustrates the estimated variation in district-level productivities. From the ACF procedure, we also get the corresponding coefficients for labor, materials, 22 We aggregate districts with fewer than 10000 manufacturing workers to a single district within a state, or merge them to neighboring larger districts in their own state.

23 Note that we calibrate χj to the impact of the incidence of a flood. The disruption probabilities in our model capture many sources of risk, climate and non-climate-related, as we discuss below. This calibration assumes all disruptions, if they occur, are as severe as the realization of flood events. We do not have other exogenous shocks to discipline the severity of other sources of risk, but we can readily assess robustness to alternative values of χj in the quantification.

24 This approach requires lagged values of labor and materials as instruments, and we need a panel of firms. However, the public version of the ASI is a cross-section of plants which prevents constructing a firm-level panel. As a solution, we use the waves for 2004-05, 2005-06, and 2006-07 to construct a synthetic panel at the industry-district level. We then treat each industry-district pair as a “firm” for the purposes of estimation.

25 Once we back out the ACF productivity for each industry-district pair, we aggregate at the region level by using weights based on the relative importance of each industry in each region. In the few cases where productivity cannot be estimated due to missing data for smaller districts, we assign those regions the average productivity of their closest neighbors. 26 and capital.

The results are shown in the left panel of Table 3, where the materials share is 0.81, the labor share 0.17, and the capital share 0.08. We compute the labor share as β = 1 − 0.81 = 0.19. Since we do not have capital in the model, we think of the labor share as the share of capital-augmented labor, so we include both capital and wage expenses into the calculations. Figure 6: Estimated productivities and disruption probabilities (a) Productivity (b) Model-Implied Risk Profile Note.

In this figure, we plot the estimated district-level productivities (left panel) and the model-implied district-level disruption probabilities (central panel). Productivities are estimated using the ACF procedure as described in the text. Baseline disruption probabilities are obtained by matching model-implied sourcing shares to the data as described in the text. The right panel plots the district-level disruption probabilities implied by the parameterized approach outlined in the text.

The scales are shown to the right of each figure. Iceberg trade costs The iceberg trade costs τij are estimated using our transaction data, leveraging our information on transaction-level prices. Our data is only available if one node of the transaction lies in one particular state, but we need to back out trade costs for each bilateral pair of districts throughout India. To address this, we proceed in two steps.

First, we use our transaction data, focus on firms in our state that sell their goods, and aggregate the data at the seller-buyer-product-time level. We then estimate Equation 25. log(ps,b,t,q ) = γ1 log(distance from s to b)s,b + γ2 1(b in same state as s)s,b + δs,q,t + ϵs,b,t,q , (25) where ps,b,t,q is the price charged by seller s to buyer b for product q at time t. For each buyer-supplier pair, we compute the log distance between them as reported in our transaction data.

We also include an indicator variable for whether the buyer (b) is in our state. The coefficient on distance captures how prices charged change as distance increases. Importantly, we add seller-product-time fixed effects δs,q,t , so effectively, the 27 coefficients γ1 and γ2 are being identified by sellers that sell the same product to multiple buyers in a given time period. The underlying assumption is that iceberg trade costs τij which are unobserved, are proportional to distance.

In our data, the same seller charges different prices to different buyers for the same product and month. We assume this variation partly depends on unobserved iceberg costs. Since we include seller-product-time fixed effects, the estimates are not driven by seller-level shocks (e.g., productivity) that may also affect prices.

Note that iceberg trade costs conventionally included observed costs such as freight or transportation, but additionally other unobserved costs such as contracting frictions, linguistic/ethnic differences, unobserved preference shifters, etc. We assume these are proportional to observed distance, which is common in gravity estimation. In our data, freight costs are not required to be included in the values of goods shipped reported, though sellers might include this.

So, it is likely our iceberg trade cost estimation might not include transportation costs. Some sellers also explicitly separately report freight costs. As robustness, we also create an “Adjusted Price” measure, which adds the reported freight costs. Estimates remain similar, but the sample is much smaller as this variable is missing for many observations in the data. The results of this regression can be found in the right panel of Table 3.

Table 3: Estimation results Panel A: Production Function Estimation Panel B: Trade Costs Estimation log(Sales) log(Materials) log(Workers) log(Fixed Capital) Number of Observations ∗∗∗ ∗∗ 0.81*** (0.076) 0.17*** (0.061) 0.08 (0.063) log(distance from s to b) 9128 Number of Observations 1(b in same state as s) log(Prices,b,t,q ) log(Adj. Prices,b,t,q ) 0.0174*** (0.0001) -0.086*** (0.0001) 0.0186*** (0.0002) -0.0798*** (0.0009) 65,477,898 45,338,641 ∗ Note.

p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.1 Panel A presents the results of the production function estimation using the ACF procedure. The reported coefficients are for log materials, log number of workers, and log fixed capital as calculated from the ASI. Panel B presents the results for the trade costs estimation using our transaction data. The outcome is the log price charged by a seller in our state (s), for a given product (q), to a buyer (b) in a given month-year period (t).

The main regressors are log distance from buyer to seller and a dummy that takes the value of 1 if the buyer is in the same state as the seller. We control for seller-product-time fixed effects. In column 2 of Panel B, we compute the adjusted price by adding the total transaction value and “other” reported costs (including freight), and dividing by quantity. Other costs include additional self-reported transportation costs not reported in the transaction value.

After this, we use the estimated coefficient to predict trade costs for the rest of India. We compute bilateral distances between the centroid of each district and use those distances to predict trade costs between regions using the estimated coefficients γ̂1 and γ̂2 . We assume that the border effect estimated through coefficient γ̂2 is the same for all states. 28 Disruption probabilities.

Our model implies that bilateral sourcing shares are pinned down by district fundamentals like productivities and labor force, and bilateral trade costs, in addition to the vector of district-level shock probabilities. Therefore, we can obtain the vector of shock probabilities, ρi , by minimizing the distance between the observed sourcing shares in the data with those implied by the model.

Importantly, in estimating the probabilities, we allow for spatial correlation in the realization of disruptions, as floods or other disruptions might affect more than one district.26 The intuition of the exercise is as follows: conditional on the rest of the parameters and moments of the model, we pick the shock probabilities of each district to minimize the distance between the model-implied shares with the observed shares of purchases from every district in our state to each other district in India.27 This is our baseline approach, as it allows us to remain agnostic on the sources of risk in the model.

Instead, we can validate our model by projecting the shock probabilities on plausible sources of risk. Panel B of Figure 6 plots the baseline disruption probabilities by district. Figure 7 illustrates the spatial correlation in disruption realizations for Ahmadabad (Panel A) or Kolkata (Panel B). As an alternative approach, we also parameterize regional risk as a function of observables, and estimate the parameters of this function, as described below.

The underlying assumption of our baseline approach is that anything that is not captured by the district-level productivities and trade costs is part of the risk of the district. Of course, in practice, such residuals do not only include flooding risk, but also many other risk components.

However, in Figure 8 and Appendix Figure D2, we show that our estimated probabilities are significantly correlated with historical and projected average rainfall, coastal flooding, and riverine flooding, average temperature and dryness. In Table 4, we run regressions of the model probabilities on the climate variables (historical and projected 2050) as well as other variables that could also be related to risk.

The climate variables such as daily rainfall, coastal flooding and average temperature are all strongly significantly correlated with the probabilities, and the R2 of the regressions 26 We assume that these disruptions are generated by a binary random variable that is equal to 1 whenever a Normal latent variable with mean 0 and standard deviation 1 is below a threshold equal to Φ−1 (ρi ), where Φ−1 is the standard normal inverse CDF.

We allow these latent variables to be correlated across regions where the correlation in the realizations between region i and region j is equal to e−ζDistij , where ζ is a measure of spatial decay in this correlation. We estimate ζ in the same routine as the probabilities, ρi . 27 We do not observe the realizations of disruptions in each district, and we remain agnostic on the sources of risk that might generate disruptions.

However, observed sourcing shares in the data include any realizations of disruptions, which we treat as structural errors. Precisely, given a sourcing strategy in each region, we generate a large number of shocks, χi , from the true distribution G (χ) , P (χi = χ) = ρi and compute the model-implied shock-inclusive sourcing shares.

We then estimate ρi by minimizing the gap between the shares in the data and the average across model simulations, allowing for the spatial  2  PS P I correlation as discussed above. Formally, minρ∈[0,1]I j∈I o sData − S1 s=1 sji {χsi }i=1 , ρi , where ji I s is a model simulation with shocks {χsi }i=1 . 29 Figure 7: Correlation in Disruption Realizations: Ahmadabad (left) and Kolkata (right) Note.

In this figure, we plot the estimated spatial correlation in disruption probabilities for districts with Ahmadabad district (left panel) and Kolkata district (right panel). are high, at 0.32-0.34. Average ruggedness also positively correlated while nightlights is uncorrelated with the disruption probabilities. Court congestion is slightly negatively correlated with disruption probabilities, although the significance is modest.

This might be because court congestion is correlated with unobserved measures such as less corruption in those regions with more active/congested courts. Finally, in Figure D1, we show that these probabilities do not show a strong correlation with either the estimated district productivities, nor the average distance to the state of our study.

Notice that this exercise requires solving jointly for the vector of district-level risk that minimizes the gap between model-implied sourcing shares and data, as all bilateral sourcing shares are equilibrium objects that depend on the fundamentals and risk of all other districts.

Further, we cannot exactly match all bilateral sourcing shares in the data, as we choose a single shock probability for each district, but we observe multiple sourcing shares for that district from all districts in our state. We, therefore, set up a Minimum Distance Estimator, which aims to match the average sourcing shares for each origin district observed across all destination districts in our data.

In practice, we also are able to match all the bilateral sourcing shares in the data well, as Figure 9 shows. As external validation, the right panel of Figure 9 shows that our model also matches the data on sales shares well, which are untargeted moments.28 28 While our estimated probabilities might seem high, as discussed above, they capture several sources of risk. Further, available evidence from Indian businesses suggests that supply chain disruptions are a key concern.

For instance, PwC’s 26th Annual Global CEO Survey in late 2022 found that 50% of India CEOs were concerned about supply chain disruptions (https://www.pwc.in/assets/pdfs/research-insights-hub/immersive-outlook-3/ paradigm-shift-in-supply-chain-management.pdf). 30 Figure 8: Model Probabilities and Historical Observables (a) Avg Daily Rainfall (b) Coastal Flooding (c) Riverine Flooding . (d) Std Precipitation Index (e) Average Temperature Note.

In this figure, we plot the estimated probabilities against historical climate observables. In Figure 8a, we correlate the probabilities with the average daily rainfall in 2019. Figures 8b and 8c use historical coastal and riverine flooding respectively. Figure 8d correlates the probabilities with a standardized precipitation index, a measure of dryness. In Figure 8e, we correlate the probabilities with average temperature.

A more detailed definition of each of the variables can be found in Appendix D.1. Figure 9: Sourcing shares: Model vs. Data (a) Input Shares (b) Output Shares Note. In this figure, we plot the sourcing shares in the data against the model. The red line is a 45-degree line. In the left panel we plot the input sourcing shares.

We target average sourcing probabilities from our state’s districts to the rest of the districts, but we do not force anything to match the particular sourcing shares of each district. The left panel plots each individual district’s input shares. The right panel shows sales shares, which are entirely untargeted. Robustness Our baseline approach has the benefit of remaining agnostic about the sources of disruptions firms face.

However, it requires estimating a disruption probability 31 Table 4: Regression of model probabilities on observables Historical Projected (2050) Historical Projected (2050) Daily Rainfall 0.104*** (0.0264) 0.0566*** (0.0182) 0.0977*** (0.0215) 0.0466*** (0.0142) Coastal Flooding 1.455*** (0.543) 1.418*** (0.311) 2.204*** (0.659) 1.878*** (0.382) Riverine Flooding 0.287 (0.337) 0.359 (0.295) 0.401 (0.333) 0.406 (0.289) Avg SPI -0.155 (0.182) -0.0444 (0.114) -0.117 (0.168) 0.0162 (0.102) Avg Temperature 0.0519*** (0.0175) 0.0669*** (0.0188) 0.0674*** (0.0187) 0.0748*** (0.0188) Avg Elevation -0.000111 (0.000324) -0.000145 (0.000315) 0.0000163 (0.000343) -0.0000707 (0.000323) Avg Ruggedness 0.0351** (0.0155) 0.0445*** (0.0155) 0.0310** (0.0157) 0.0435*** (0.0155) Avg Court Congestion -0.100* (0.0533) -0.0861* (0.0468) Avg Nightlights Luminosity 0.00831 (0.00758) 0.00931 (0.00722) 271 0.341 271 0.327 N adj.

R-sq 271 0.322 271 0.313 Note. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. We estimate regressions of the inverse logit of the estimated model probabilities on observables. In columns 1 and 3, climate variables used are measured with their historical values. In columns 2 and 4, climate variables used are measured with the projected values for 2050. Observables are in levels. A more detailed definition of each of the variables can be found in Appendix D.1.

for each district, which is a large number of parameters. As an alternative, we assume that the disruption risk in each district is a function of observables, including the climate and alternative variables in Table 4. We then estimate the coefficients of this function to minimize the distance between model-implied and observed sourcing shares. This has the advantage that we restrict the number of parameters to be estimated to 11.

However, as we do not observe all sources of disruptions, there will be more unexplained variation. Panel A of Figure E7 illustrates district-level disruption risk implied by this approach. Unsurprisingly, as the observable risk measures were correlated with the “agnostic” risk from our baseline approach, the results of the parameterized approach are also correlated with our baseline.

Appendix E.1 outlines this approach in more detail, provides the estimated coefficients, and presents all our quantitative results under this alternative approach. Our main conclusions remain unchanged. Table 5 summarizes our model calibration. 32 Table 5: Calibrated moments 4.3 Parameter Source Li : Labor endowments Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), 2019-20 ϕi : Region productivities Ackerberg et al.

(2015) estimation (ASI, 2004-2007) τij : Iceberg trade costs Regression of within firm-product price on distance between buyer and seller (Transaction data) ρi : Shock probabilities Minimum distance estimator using sourcing shares across districts (Transaction data) χi : Shock parameter Match drop in buyer purchases from event study (Transaction data) β: Labor share 0.19: Ackerberg et al. (2015) estimation (ASI, 2004-2007) σ: Demand elasticity 2: Based on Boehm et al.

(2023) Quantitative Results We begin by showing that the model delivers a strong negative relationship between shock probabilities and relative nominal wages (and real wages) in the cross-section. Figure 10 shows that both nominal and real wages are negatively correlated with shock probabilities, as we would expect.

These results quantitatively validate the key trade-off in the model, between sourcing risk and input costs, and illustrate the baseline distributional consequences of risk: higher risk regions are poorer in real terms. In Figure D3, we also show that the price index and the variance in real wages are negatively correlated with the shock probabilities. Figure 10: Shock probabilities and wages (a) Nominal Wages (b) Real Wages Note.

In this figure, we plot model-derived nominal (left panel) and real wages (right panel) against the estimated shock probabilities. Figure D3 further plots the price index and the variance in real wages against the shock probabilities. 33 Probabilities and sourcing shares. To illustrate the rich heterogeneity in bilateral sourcing patterns in the quantitative model, we show the sourcing choices of two districts in Figure 11.

The left panel illustrates the sourcing patterns of Ahmadabad, a relatively low-risk district. The right panel shows the sourcing shares chosen by Kolkata, a higher-risk district. In both districts, firms diversify, but sourcing strategies depend on geography – they source more from relatively geographically closer areas than, say, the far south of India.

Diversification also depends on the risk profile of the origin district – for Kolkata, the model implies the district’s firms choose more interdistrict sourcing to mitigate risk. Ahmadabad’s own-district sourcing share is 39%, while Kolkata’s is 32%. Sourcing is not purely determined by proximity; it also depends on the spatial correlation of disruptions with the own district, and on the distribution of disruption probabilities across space.

Comparing these patterns to Figure 7, both districts clearly source from districts less spatially correlated with themselves as well. Notice that the sourcing patterns for both districts imply several zeros (our solution algorithm permits zero sourcing shares in equilibrium, as discussed in Section 4.1). In Appendix Figure D4, we show that under free trade, the sourcing patterns for all regions are identical, and each region sources from districts all over the country.

Figure 11: Ahmadabad and Kolkata sourcing shares Note. In this figure, we plot model sourcing shares for Ahmadabad district (left panel) and Kolkata district (right panel). Expected real wages under baseline and autarky. The comparative statics in Section 3 show that with identical regional fundamentals, calibrated trade costs, and independent disruption probabilities, expected real wages are lower for all regions with costly trade than in autarky, and their variance was also lower.

To assess whether this mechanism is quantitatively relevant in the calibrated model with varying regional fundamentals, estimated trade costs, and disruption probabilities that are spatially correlated, 34 we compute the difference in expected real wages in the baseline model with the modelimplied expected real wages given the same regional fundamentals, disruption probabilities and infinite trade costs.

Figure 12 illustrates the spatial variation of expected real wages in the baseline model and in the autarky counterfactual. On average, expected real wages are 3.1% higher in autarky than in the baseline model. The variance of real wages is 9.2% higher in autarky than in the baseline model, validating the quantitative relevance of the main comparative statics exercises. Overall, autarky is welfare decreasing for all regions.

Welfare decreases on average by 7.3%, as the change in volatility more than offsets the gain in log expected real wages. 0.74% of districts see real wage declines, unlike in the comparative statics where all regions had higher real wages in autarky. Expected real wages under baseline and free trade. In contrast, Figure 12 shows that expected real wages are higher for all regions under a free trade counterfactual, and their volatility is lower, so the welfare gains from free trade are large.

To implement free trade in our quantitative exercise, we set the iceberg trade costs to 1 between all districts. Under free trade, expected real wages are, on average, 5.9% higher than in the baseline, whereas the variance of real wages is 2.8% lower. Welfare is on average 8.9% higher and no district is worse off under free trade. Shock propagation Our framework can also be used to assess the effect of disruptions ex-post for aggregate welfare.

In Panel A of Figure 13, we show, for each origin district, what is the impact of a disruption in that district on the real wages of all other districts (including itself). We use the size of the labor force in each district to compute the weighted average of the effect. The impact of a realized disruption in a district on the rest depends on how large is the affected district as a supplier to the rest.

The effects vary widely by district, with shocks that materialize in lower-risk or more productive districts that are more important as sourcing locations in equilibrium having larger welfare consequences. While the “own” effect of the shock is important, a large component (62.6% on average) of the aggregate welfare changes happens through the propagation of the shock, as Panel B of the figure illustrates.

Here, we plot the aggregate welfare changes caused by the incidence of a disruption in each origin district, excluding the own effect. Finally, Panel C illustrates the number of districts that experience a welfare decline when an origin district experiences a disruption. Inventories. In Appendix C.5, we show that mean and median product-level inventories are less than a month’s sales, and that inventories are not correlated with the prevalence of multisourcing.

On the other hand, 74% of the value of HS-8 products are multisourced. 35 Figure 12: Quantitative results Panel A: Expected Welfare (a) Baseline (b) ∆ in Autarky (c) ∆ in Free Trade Panel B: Log of expected real wages (d) Baseline (e) ∆ in Autarky (f) ∆ in Free Trade Panel C: Variance of real wages (g) Baseline (h) ∆ in Autarky (i) ∆ in Free Trade Note. This figure shows welfare (Panel A), expected real wages (Panel B) and their variance (Panel C).

The left column shows welfare, expected real wages and their variance in the baseline calibrated model. In the middle and right columns, the figure shows the percentage changes in these variables under the autarky and the free trade counterfactuals relative to the baseline scenario.

While inventories and multisourcing would appear to be alternative strategies for risk 36 Figure 13: Shock Propagation (a) Weighted Average Welfare (b) Weighted Average Welfare (c) Number of regions with Change Change in Other Regions Welfare Decline > 1% Note. In Panel A, for each district, we compute the impact a materialized disruption has on the real wages of all other districts (including itself). We then use the labor force in each district to calculate the weighted average of the impact.

Panel B, removes the own impact in real wages of a disruption, to isolate the “propagation” effect to other districts. Panel C, reports the number of districts that experience a welfare decline, when the district experiences a disruption. mitigation, in practice it appears firms are systematically choosing multisourcing.29 That said, the additional regressions in Appendix B.1.2 illustrated that following a flood, sales of exposed firms declined by less than their inputs.

In fact, the decline in sales is 44% of inputs. While inventories might explain this, in fact our calibrated model without inventories implies that sales declines less than inputs upon the incidence of a shock. Equation (10) illustrates that the partial elasticity of firm profits to delivered inputs is (1−β)(σ−1) . Quantitatively, given our parameter calibration, this implies that sales fall by β+σ(1−β) 47% of the fall in inputs, which is very similar to the drop observed in the data.

4.4 Climate Change Counterfactuals While the previous section explored several counterfactuals, such as autarky or free trade, we next study the implications of varying climate risk in our model. We estimate the share of our model-implied shock probabilities that can be explained by climate-riskrelated variables such as rainfall or flooding events. Through the lens of our model, these probabilities capture the risk firms assign to each district.

However, as discussed above, the risk associated with each region can be due to climate risk, as well as other regional characteristics such as infrastructure or governance. In this section, to highlight the implications of changing climate risk, we hold all other sources of risk constant and change only the climate risk of each region relative to the baseline.

To discipline how climate risk changes, we proceed as follows: First, we regress the inverse 29 We lack inventory holding costs in India, so the unobserved tradeoff might be that inventory depreciation rates are high, making it a less attractive strategy for risk mitigation. 37 logit transformation of our probabilities on historical measures of rainfall, coastal flooding, riverine flooding, temperature and the standardized precipitation index presented in Figure 8.

Second, we use the estimated coefficients, shown in Column (1) of Table 4, to predict the counterfactual disruption probabilities in 2050, for our five climate measures, while holding constant the unexplained variation in these probabilities. This method yields how the probabilities would change if climate variables evolve as predicted in the RCP 4.5 scenario of the International Project for Climate Change (IPCC).

Figure 14: Counterfactuals: Climate Risk Increase (a) A: ∆ in Probabilities (b) B: ∆ in Welfare (c) C: ∆ Input Prices and Probabilities (d) D: ∆ and Initial Welfare Note.

In this figure, we plot the change in probabilities of climate risk (panel A), the change in welfare (panel B), the relationship between the change in input prices and changes in probabilities change in expected real wages (panel C), and the relationship between the change in welfare in the counterfactual and the welfare at baseline when climate risk increases as described in Section 4.4. Panel A of Figure 14 illustrates how these probabilities change across space in our main counterfactual.

As the figure makes clear, there is wide variation in the changes in climate risk, with the northeast and parts of the west coast seeing large increases in risk, while the central part of the country sees decreases in risk. On average, risk increases by 1.1 percentage points. Panel B illustrates the change in expected welfare in this counterfactual. Welfare on average decreases by 2.01%. There is wide spatial variation, with a range of 3.11pp, and some of the less risky regions see welfare gains.

62.73% of districts see real wage declines. 38 To understand the mechanisms at work, Panel C shows how the change in district supplier prices correlates with changes in district risk. Input prices offered by intermediate firms from the district decrease the most for districts experiencing the largest increases in risk.

This negative terms-of-trade effect arises from the decline in nominal wages in these risky regions in equilibrium.30 Panel D illustrates the change in welfare, and relates it to the initial district welfare. This highlights the distributional consequences of climate change in our quantification: the change in welfare is positively correlated with initial welfare.

In other words, initially well-off regions see relative welfare improvements following climate risk increases, while initially worse-off regions see welfare declines. A key quantitative finding is that here, sourcing diversification of firms amplifies the effects of climate risk increases.

Climate risk will not only subject riskier regions to increased shocks, but also to a decrease in real wages as firm supply chains become less reliant on these regions.31 Table 6 summarizes the quantitative results across all counterfactuals. Table 6: Model Counterfactuals: Summary Counterfactual ∆ in Welfare ∆ in log Expected Real Wages ∆ in Real Wage Volatility % districts Avg. change Range Avg. change Range Avg.

change Range Real wage declines Baseline risk Autarky Free Trade -7.29 8.94 2.92 2.30 3.10 5.92 1.87 1.70 9.25 -2.84 3.99 0.96 0.74% 0.00% Alternative risk Climate change ∆ in Rainfall and Flood Risk Only ∆ in Temperature and SPI Risk Only -2.01 -0.24 -1.76 3.11 3.52 2.69 -1.96 -0.25 -1.72 3.10 3.46 2.64 0.15 0.06 0.06 0.13 0.13 0.13 62.73% 25.09% 86.72% Note.

This table shows statistics of the distribution of percentage changes between the baseline scenario with current climate risk and costly trade and other scenarios, weighted by district population. Range refers to the interquartile range. Robustness and extensions. In addition to our main climate counterfactual, we also consider scenarios where only rainfall and floor risk, or only temperature changes and SPI changes occur. Table 6 summarizes the results.

While in both cases average welfare declines and there is wide spatial variation, under the scenario of only temperature/SPI changes, 86.72% of districts see real wage declines, while with only rainfall/flood risk increases, 25.09% of districts see real wage declines. Appendix Figures D5 and D6 shows these results in detail, where other risk factors are held constant. Appendix E estimates two alternative models and conducts the counterfactuals in these Recall input prices pi = wzii .

Effectively, the nominal wages in risky regions are decreasing, by more than the increase in risk as firms diversify away from riskier regions. 31 This is not a mechanical result, but rather, depends on the spatial distribution of climate risk, the initial equilibrium, and the IPCC predictions for which areas are getting riskier. If initially higher welfare areas saw larger changes in predicted climate risk, they would not see relative welfare increases.

30 39 Figure 15: Distributional Implications of Climate Change Adaptation Note: This figure plots the difference in the change in welfare for regions if true climate risk changes and regions are “myopic” compared to the case where true climate risk changes and regions adapt, relative to the initial known climate risk. The x-axis orders regions by their change in true climate risk. Regions in red see an increase in true climate risk, while regions in blue see a decrease in true climate risk. cases.

We first consider a model where the district probabilities are obtained from projections on climate-related variables, as discussed in Section 4.2. Second, we consider a model where the input bundle is CES, with a substitution elasticity of 3.1 (Peter and Ruane, 2023). Table E2 summarizes the results for these two alternative models. Strikingly, the two models deliver very similar implications for the climate counterfactuals, in terms of the welfare declines and spatial variation.

Climate change myopia. As a final exercise, we consider a scenario where climate risk increases as projected by the IPCC, but agents believe that climate risk is unchanged from the baseline. In practice, we start in the baseline equilibrium, but simulate a model where shocks are drawn from the new distribution with changed climate risk. Figure 15 illustrates the results.

The red bars show the change in welfare for regions that have true climate risk increases in the myopic scenario relative to the change in welfare in the scenario where agents know the true new risk probabilities and, therefore, adapt. The blue bars show the differential change in welfare across these two scenarios for regions with true climate risk decreases. Climate adaptation has large distributional consequences.

Welfare declines with adaptation in regions where underlying climate risk is increasing. The intuition is that firms believe these regions are lower risk, and so there is less diversification away from them and less downward pressure on their wages than if firms understood their true risk. The converse happens to regions where climate risk is going down in the counterfactual.

If firms do not internalize that these regions will be less risky, they do not see their attractiveness as sourcing locations increase.32 32 Note that the direct effect of the shocks themselves also has an impact, so truly higher risk regions 40 5 Conclusion Climate risk is an increasingly important concern worldwide, with large projected economic impacts. Adaptation of firm supply chains to perceived climate risk is a crucial channel through which economies might adjust to climate risk.

Such adaptation has implications for the spatial concentration of economic activity and regional income. Regions that are low-risk but less productive might see increases in their real wages as firms diversify their supply chains. This paper provides empirical evidence suggesting firm supply chains are structured taking climate risk into account.

Our new model of firm supply chain decisions under risk incorporates key patterns we see in the data: firms source the same inputs from multiple locations and seek drier regions to source inputs even when they are farther away. The model results suggest that, on the one hand, input sourcing decisions mitigate climate risk as firms diversify their sources. Yet, on the other hand, they amplify the distributional effects, as regions that face adverse climate shocks will also suffer lower real wages.

Our quantification exercise infers that the impact of climate risk on firm sourcing delivers important implications for economic activity across space. In particular, expected real wages are higher for regions that are less risky. On average, increases in climate risk decrease welfare, but there is wide spatial variation. Initially worse-off regions see welfare declines, while initially better off regions see relative welfare gains.

Climate “myopia” can benefit relatively risky regions, as myopic firms do not diversify away from them. will see more shocks and an impact on their price indices as a result. Therefore while on average they benefit when there is no adaptation, these regions might still see welfare declines relative to the baseline. 41 References Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2015, November). Identification Properties of Recent Production Function Estimators. Econometrica 83 (6), 2411–2451.

Adamopoulos, T. and F. Leibovici (2024). Trade Risk and Food Security. Working paper . Alfaro Ureña, A., M. Fuentes Fuentes, I. Manelici, and J. P. Vasquez (2018). Costa Rican Production Network: Stylized Facts. Working paper . Allen, T. and D. Atkin (2022). Volatility and the Gains from Trade. Econometrica 90 (5), 2053–2092. Antràs, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017, September). The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory and Evidence from US Firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2514–64.

Balboni, C. (2024, October). In Harm’s Way? Infrastructure Investments and the Persistence of Coastal Cities. Mimeo. Balboni, C., J. Boehm, and M. Waseem (2024). Firm Adaptation and Production Networks: Structural Evidence from Extreme Weather Events in Pakistan. Mimeo. Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input Specificity and the Propagation of Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1543–1592. Bezanson, J., A. Edelman, S. Karpinski, and V. B. Shah (2017).

Julia: A Fresh Approach to Numerical Computing. SIAM Review 59 (1), 65–98. Bilal, A. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2023, June). Anticipating Climate Change Across the United States. Working Paper 31323, National Bureau of Economic Research. Blaum, J., F. Esposito, and S. Heise (2024). Input Sourcing Under Risk: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing Firms. Mimeo. Boehm, C. E., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2019, March).

Input Linkages and the Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku Earthquake. The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1), 60–75. Boehm, C. E., A. A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2023, April). The Long and Short (Run) of Trade Elasticities. American Economic Review 113 (4), 861–905. Borusyak, K., X. Jaravel, and J. Spiess (2024). Revisiting Event Study Designs: Robust and Efficient Estimation. Review of Economic Studies. Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2015, 11).

Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA. The Review of Economic Studies 82 (1), 1–44. Callaway, B. and P. H. C. Sant’Anna (2020). Difference-in-Differences with Multiple Time Periods. Journal of Econometrics. Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2021, May). Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake. Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (2), 1255–1321. 42 Caselli, F., M. Koren, M. Lisicky, and S. Tenreyro (2019, 09).

Diversification Through Trade. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1), 449–502. Castro-Vincenzi, J. (2024, June). Climate Hazards and Resilience in the Global Car Industry. mimeo. Cevallos Fujiy, B., D. Ghose, and G. Khanna (2021). Production Networks and Firm-level Elasticities of Substitution. Working Paper . Cevallos Fujiy, B., G. Khanna, and H. Toma (2023). Cultural Proximity and Production Networks. Working Paper . Cruz, J.-L. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2023). The Economic Geography of Global Warming.

Technical report. Desmet, K., R. E. Kopp, S. A. Kulp, D. K. Nagy, M. Oppenheimer, E. Rossi-Hansberg, and B. H. Strauss (2021, April). Evaluating the Economic Cost of Coastal Flooding. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13 (2), 444–86. Dreze, J. H. (1985). (uncertainty and) the firm in general equilibrium theory. The Economic Journal 95, 1–20. Dube, A., D. Girardi, O. Jorda, and A. Taylor (2023). A Local Projections Approach to Difference-in-Differences Event Studies. NBER Working Paper 31184 .

Esposito, F. (2022). Demand risk and diversification through international trade. Journal of International Economics 135 (103562). Farrokhi, F. and A. Lashkaripour (2024). Can Trade Policy Mitigate Climate Change? . Working Paper. Ferris, M. C. and T. S. Munson (1999). Interfaces to PATH 3.0: Design, Implementation and Usage. Computational Optimization and Applications 12 (1), 207–227. Goldberg, P. K. and T. Reed (2023). Is the Global Economy Deglobalizing? And If So, Why? And What Is Next?

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2023, 347–396. Goodman-Bacon, A. (2021). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing. Journal of Econometrics 225 (2), 254–277. Themed Issue: Treatment Effect 1. Grossman, G., E. Helpman, and H. Lhuillier (2023). Supply Chain Resilience: Should Policy Promote Diversification or Reshoring? Journal of Political Economy 131. Grossman, G., E. Helpman, and A. Sabal (2024). Resilience in vertical supply chains. Mimeo.

Gu, G. and G. Hale (2023, December). Climate Risks and FDI. Journal of International Economics 146. Helpman, E. and A. Razin (1978, August). Welfare Aspects of International Trade in Goods and Securities. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 92 (3), 489–508. Hsiao, A. (2023). Sea Level Rise and Urban Adaptation in Jakarta. Mimeo. 43 Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K.-M. Yi (2001, June). The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in World Trade. Journal of International Economics 54, 75–96. Huo, Z., A.

A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2024, 03). International Comovement in the Global Production Network. The Review of Economic Studies. Indaco, A., F. Ortega, Taspınar, and Süleyman (2020, 11). Hurricanes, Flood Risk and the Economic Adaptation of Businesses. Journal of Economic Geography 21 (4), 557–591. Jia, R., X. Ma, and V. W. Xie (2022, July). Expecting Floods: Firm Entry, Employment, and Aggregate Implications. Working Paper 30250, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2012). Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing and Trade in Value Added. Journal of International Economics 86 (2), 224 – 236. Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera (2017). A Portrait of Trade in Value-Added over Four Decades. The Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (5), 896–911. Khanna, G., N. Morales, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2022). Supply Chain Resilience: Evidence from Indian Firms.

NBER Working Papers 30689, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. Kopytov, A., B. Mishra, K. Nimark, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2024, September). Endogenous Production Networks under Supply Chain Uncertainty. Econometrica. Korovkin, V., A. Makarin, and Y. Miyauchi (2024). Supply Chain Disruption and Reorganization: Theory and Evidence From Ukraine’s War. Working Paper. Lubin, M., O. Dowson, J. Dias Garcia, J. Huchette, B. Legat, and J. P. Vielma (2023).

JuMP 1.0: Recent Improvements to a Modeling Language for Mathematical Optimization. Mathematical Programming Computation. Nath, I. (2024). Climate Change, the Food Problem, and the Challenge of Adaptation through Sectoral Reallocation. Mimeo. Pankratz, N. and C. Schiller (2024). Climate Change and Adaptation in Global SupplyChain Networks. Review of Financial Studies 37 (6), 1729–1777. Pellet, T. and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2023). Rigid Production Networks. Journal of Monetary Economics 137 (C), 86–102.

Peter, A. and C. Ruane (2023, May). The aggregate importance of intermediate input substitutability. NBER Working Paper No. 31233. Stiglitz, J. E. (1972). On the optimality of the stock market allocation of investment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 86 (1), 25–60. Sun, L. and S. Abraham (2021). Estimating Dynamic Treatment Effects in Event Studies with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects. Journal of Econometrics 225 (2), 175–199. Yi, K.-M. (2003, February).

Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade? Journal of Political Economy 111 (1), 52–102. 44 Appendix for online publication only A Details on the Firm-to-Firm Data We illustrate a stylized example of our establishment-level networks data in Figure A1. As the diagram shows, we observe all transactions where one node of the transaction is within the state.

This includes all transactions between establishments within the state (the yellow lines), any inflows from or outflows to the rest of the country (the blue lines), and all international imports and exports (the green lines). Figure A1: Stylized Example of Establishment-Level Network Notes: Stylized example of establishment-level data. The upper half represents the country, and the upper left quadrant represents the state in question.

The data includes all transactions within the state, and all transactions where one node of the transaction (either buyer or seller) is in the state. The data report value and quantity of traded items, so we can construct unit values. To do this, we aggregate values and quantities at the four-digit HSN/month/transaction level, and then construct implied unit values.

We can then collapse the data at the 4-digit HSN/month level to construct average unit values, the number of transactions between each seller and buyer pair, and total value of the goods transacted. This is the foundation of the firm-to-firm dataset we use in the analysis. Additionally, we can aggregate these data to the buyer level, which we use in our reduced-form section. Table A1 summarizes our primary variables of interest using this dataset.

In Table A2 we present statistics on the number of buyers per supplier and suppliers per buyer. Despite differences in region sizes, the distribution of firms follows closely the one documented by Alfaro Ureña et al. (2018) for Costa Rica. i Table A1: Summary Statistics for Main Variables Outcome Mean Separation Rate (%) Entry Rate (%) Net Separations (%) Real Input Value (log) Real Sales (log) Avg. Supplier Size (millions of rupees) Avg. Supplier Outdegree Share Purch. Lgst.

Supplier (%) Number Products Share Purch. Diff. Prod. (%) Supply Chain Depth Number Suppliers Avg. Distance (km) Share Purch. Non-Home State (%) 30.9 74.06 -43.12 14.91 16.33 106.42 43.04 52.39 12.05 60.19 32.32 12.35 486.71 38.54 p25 p50 p75 0 16.67 52.78 0 50 106.67 -70 0 0 12.48 14.55 16.96 13.57 16.05 18.66 9.65 34.04 127.49 3.3 10.97 31.99 31.06 47.84 71.82 3 7 14 21.25 72.78 97.81 28.15 31.46 36.35 3 7 14 97.13 251.65 712.75 0 24.42 78.48 Note.

We calculate summary statistics for key outcomes to describe the network. Summary statistics calculated in December 2019-February 2020. Number of firms included in calculations: 136,562. Table A2: Distribution of buyers and suppliers Mean SD 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 99th N suppliers per buyer N of buyers per supplier 8.0 16.3 23.6 55.3 1 1 1 1 3 4 8 12 18 36 29 65 72 194 N supplier districts per buyer N buyer districts per supplier 3.5 3.1 4.4 3.0 1 1 1 1 2 2 4 4 7 7 11 10 21 14 Note.

We calculate network characteristics for the year 2019. The top two rows compute the number of buyers per supplier and suppliers per buyer. The bottom rows compute the number of supplier districts per buyer and number of buyer districts per supplier. B Empirical Facts Appendix In Table 1 we show that firms seem to multi-source products even within detailed product categories. We proceed to show that such results is not driven by retailers and wholesalers.

While we cannot directly identify retailers and wholesalers in our data, we can use the pattern of their transactions to infer firms that likely belong to those industries. For retailers, we expect that they would sell their goods predominantly to final consumers instead of shipping their goods to other firms, hence they should show up as having zero sales in our data. For wholesalers, we expect that they would not transform the products they buy in order to sell them.

Hence, we identify as wholesaler firms that buy and sell the same HSN-4 products. Of course, these classifications will be overestimating retailers and wholesalers, as manufacturing firms might buy and sell the same 4-digit product or not ship goods to other firms. However, we want to corroborate that our results are robust to excluding these firms. ii From our sample in 2019, we have a total of 195,872 firms.

Of those, 7,867 fall under our classification of wholesalers and 137,574 fall under our classification of retailer. As shown in Table B1, the distributions of regions sourced from stay fairly constant when excluding such firms. Similarly, we show that the results are consistent when we look at the number of suppliers per product as opposed to supplier districts.

As shown in Table B2, there is a slightly larger fraction of firms that source from more than one supplier than when looking at sourcing from different supplier districts.

Table B1: Firms that source from multiple districts (excluding wholesale and retail) Number of districts Share of buyers 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10+ Share of buyers x HSN-4 Share of buyers x HSN-8 Firms Value Firms Value Firms Value 12.0% 13.4% 12.4% 10.6% 8.9% 7.3% 6.0% 5.0% 4.1% 20.3% 1.5% 2.0% 2.8% 3.0% 3.1% 3.7% 3.4% 3.8% 3.4% 73.3% 69.4% 16.4% 6.4% 3.0% 1.6% 1.0% 0.6% 0.4% 0.3% 0.9% 9.6% 9.8% 8.9% 8.0% 7.5% 6.4% 4.5% 4.6% 4.0% 36.6% 80.9% 12.6% 3.5% 1.4% 0.6% 0.3% 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.2% 21.6% 15.4% 11.1% 10.0% 5.9% 4.5% 4.5% 2.9% 3.1% 21.1% Note.

Column 1 aggregates the data at the firm level and computes the share of firms that source from a certain number of districts. Column 2 calculates the fraction of total value purchased by number of supplier districts sourced from. Columns 3-4 aggregate the data at the firm-by-4-digit product level, and Columns 5-6 at the firm-by-8-digit product level. We exclude likely-retailers and likely-wholesalers from the analysis.

Next, we show that firms that have larger purchases of a given product are more likely to source from multiple regions. To see this, we rank all firm-by-8-digit HSN pairs into percentiles, based on total purchases, where the higher percentiles include the firm-product pairs with the higher purchase volume. As shown in Figure B1, the smallest firm-product pairs tend to only source from a single supplier.

However, towards the end of the distribution, the largest firm-product pairs source, on average, from more than one region. Firms above the 95th percentile source, on average, from two districts, and firms in the top percentile source from four. This suggests that larger, more productive firms are more likely to multisource. However, firm size does not drive the descriptive patterns shown in Figures 1a-1c.

In Table B3, we document that our descriptive patterns under Fact 2 are not driven by firm size, product composition or capacity of suppliers.

We run a regression at the product-firm level as shown in equation 26. iii Table B2: Share of firms that source from multiple suppliers Number of suppliers Share of buyers 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10+ Share of buyers x HSN-4 Share of buyers x HSN-8 Firms Value Firms Value Firms Value 28.6% 16.0% 10.4% 7.4% 5.4% 4.2% 3.4% 2.7% 2.3% 19.6% 2.3% 6.7% 2.3% 2.2% 1.8% 1.8% 1.8% 1.6% 2.0% 77.4% 70.6% 15.0% 5.7% 2.9% 1.6% 1.0% 0.7% 0.5% 0.4% 1.6% 15.7% 9.2% 7.2% 5.8% 6.5% 4.8% 3.5% 2.9% 3.3% 41.1% 81.7% 11.7% 3.4% 1.4% 0.7% 0.4% 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.3% 24.5% 17.1% 12.7% 8.4% 5.2% 4.7% 3.0% 2.6% 2.5% 19.4% Note.

In this table we look at number of supplier firms instead of number of supplier districts. Column 1 aggregates the data at the firm level and computes the share of firms that source from a certain number of suppliers. Column 2 calculates the fraction of total value purchased by number of suppliers sourced from. Columns 3-4 aggregate the data at the firm-by-4-digit product level, and Columns 5-6 at the firm-by-8-digit product level. Figure B1: Number of supplier districts by total purchases Note.

We rank all firm-product pairs into percentiles (1-100) based on the volume of total purchases in 2019. For each percentile (in the horizontal axis), we compute the average number of districts the firm-product pairs source from.

log yj,p = β 1(Firm j multisources p) + γXj + δp + ϵj,p (26) Where log yj,p is the log of the average characteristic of a firm’s suppliers such as average distance to suppliers, average rainfall of supplier districts, average riverine flooding of iv supplier districts and average prices paid to suppliers. The key explanatory variable is 1(Firm j multisources p) which is a dummy that indicates whether the firm sources product p from more than one district.

Importantly, we control for product fixed effects, the log of total purchases by firm j, and log average sales of suppliers. As shown in Table B3, our descriptive patterns are robust to adding these controls. Multisourcers buy products from distances 76% farther than single-sourcers. They also source from districts with 2.3% lower rainfall and 1.4 % lower river flooding levels. Finally, they pay 44% higher input prices than single sourcers.

The product fixed effects help us rule out that the differences between single sourcers and multisourcers are driven by differences in product quality. The own purchases control rules out that the patterns are just driven by differences in firm size (e.g. large firms multisource more and also pay higher prices). Finally, the control for supplier size helps us rule out that the reason for multisourcing is that their suppliers don’t have enough capacity to meet demand.

Table B3: Supplier characteristics by number of districts sourced from Log (Distance to suppliers) Log(Daily Rainfall) Log(Historical riverine flooding) Log(Price of inputs) 1(Multisourcer) 0.760*** -0.0229*** -0.0140*** 0.441*** N R-sq 739,520 0.327 739,520 0.271 739,520 0.124 739,520 0.545 Note. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. We run a cross-sectional regression at the firm (j), 8-digit product (p) level.

The outcome is the log average distance to suppliers (column 1), log average daily rainfall at suppliers’ district (column 2), log average riverine flooding at suppliers’ district (column 3) and log average price of inputs (column 4). The main regressor is a dummy variable on whether the firm sources the HSN-8 product from more than one district. All regressions include HSN-8 product fixed effects and controls for log size of the firm and log average size of suppliers.

B.1 Responses to flooding events - additional results. B.1.1 Data Climate data. We use data from the Dartmouth Flood Observatory to identify geocoded flooding events throughout India for our event study analysis. As shown in Figure B2, we identify 19 events of large monsoonal floods throughout India between 2018 and 2021.

For our event study analysis, we limit the set of floods to those that occurred outside of our state, for which we have at least 3 months of data before and after the flood, and where at least 200 buyers in our state transacted with affected suppliers the period before the flood.

These restrictions leave us with seven large flood events, which we use in our analysis Fact 4 in Section 2.2. v Figure B2: Monsoonal rain floods, 2018-2020 Note: The figure plots the geographic coverage of all large floods that occurred between 2018 and 2020, as described in the Dartmouth Flood Observatory. B.1.2 Two-way Fixed Effects Analysis In this Section, we delve deeper into the event-study results presented in Figure 2.

For exposition clarity, we run difference-in-difference specifications which we summarize in Table B4. In the top panel, we present the two-way fixed effects specifications with continuous treatment as described below. In the middle panel, we present the results for a binary treatment. Finally, in the bottom panel, we present the results using the Local Projections Difference-in-Differences (LP-DID) estimator developed by Dube et al. (2023).

This last set of estimates further accounts for issues raised by recent discussions on two-way fixed effects methods (Borusyak et al., 2024; Callaway and Sant’Anna, 2020; Goodman-Bacon, 2021). We begin with documenting the direct effect on suppliers in flood-hit zones, where we examine outcomes yj,t,k,τ for firm j, in period t, industry k, and event τ . yj,t,k,τ = α1 (Exposed to flood)jτ × Postt,τ + x=+5 X [δτ,x + βx Xj,x<0 ] + δj + δk,t + ϵj,t,k,τ .

(27) x=−5 Here, the variable “Exposed to floodjτ ” takes a value of 1 if firm j was exposed to a particular flood. We index the months before and after flood happened by x, with x = 0 being the month the flood τ occurs. We include a wide range of high-dimensional fixed effects to account for confounding shocks.

These include firm fixed effects δj that control for firm-specific time-invariant differences; industry-by-time fixed effects δk,t that control vi for industry-specific shocks; and flood event-time since flood fixed effects δτ,x that control for aggregate trends around the flood event that affect all firms (including those not in the flood-exposed areas).

We also control for firm size-specific shocks, by controlling for sales in the five months before the flood Xj,x<0 , interacted with time-since flood indicators. In all difference-in-difference results we restrict the post period to 3 months after the flood. Consistent with the results in Figure 2a, we find that affected sellers experience a 13% decline in sales, on average, with respect to non-affected firms the three months after the flood occurs.

Next, we look into the effect of a flood for buyers located in our state. We use the existing supplier network (in the 5-months leading to the flood) as a measure of the exposure to the disruption, as described in equation B.1.2. (Supplier Exposure)jτ = N X si,j,τ,x<0 × 1 (Supplier i exposed to flood in τ ) , i where si,j,τ,x<0 is the value of purchases that firm j buys from firm i, relative to firm j’s total purchases, over the five months before the flood.

We then standardize this index and interact it with a post flood indicator to study how buyers were affected when their suppliers were hit. We examine outcomes yj,t,k,τ for firm j, in period t, and industry k, measured in event-time (since flood) τ equation 28: yj,t,k,τ = γ (Flood Exposure)jτ × Postt,τ + x=+5 X [δτ,x + βx Xj,x<0 ] + δj + δr,k,t + ϵj,t,k,τ .

(28) x=−5 The fixed effects are similar to equation 27 but we add an industry-region-time fixed effect δk,r,t to control for local demand shocks affecting the region-industry of the firm. In columns 2-4 of Table B4, we present the results for the outcomes of log total purchases (column 2), log purchases of returning suppliers (column 3) and log purchases of new suppliers (column 4).

We define returning suppliers as those suppliers who transacted with the firm within 3-months before the shock, and track the purchases from that set of suppliers throughout time. New suppliers are defined as suppliers who transact with the firm in a given period who have not transacted before. Difference-in-difference results are consistent with the event studies in Figures 2b and 2c.

In column 5 of Table B4, we present the results for the outcome of buyer sales.33 Buyers with one standard deviation higher exposure experience a decline in sales of 2% relative 33 As our data does not include sales made directly to consumers, we need to impose some additional restrictions to ensure that we focus on firms that consistently sell to other firms.

We restrict the sales sample to firms that are observed selling something to other firms every month for the last nine months prior to the flood. We also restrict the sample to be the same as the purchases sample, so we consider the log of 1+sales in cases where the firm is not observed selling anything that period. vii to buyers with average exposure.

When considering the binary treatment in the second panel, we find that firms exposed to the flood through their suppliers experience a decline of 7% relative to firms that are not exposed. When focusing on the result for sales with binary treatment, we find that for every 1% decrease in the purchases for exposed buyers, sales drop by 0.44% (exposed buyers decrease purchases by 16% and sales by 7% relative to non exposed buyers).

We compare this result to the one implied by our model which, using a back-of-the-envelope calculation, indicates that for every 1% decline in purchases, sales decrease by 0.47%. The close result is reassuring given that our sales result is untargeted by our estimation process. Table B4: Regression results on the impact of floods.

Supplier sales Buyer Purchases Total Buyer Purchases Returning Suppliers Buyer Purchases New suppliers Buyer Sales Input prices - -0.05*** (0.003) 1,218,663 -0.05*** (0.003) 1,160,881 -0.03*** (0.01) 606,655 -0.02*** (0.01) 468,280 -0.009 (0.01) 1,912,563 -0.13*** (0.02) 1,604,955 -0.16*** (0.01) 1,218,663 -0.24*** (0.01) 1,160,881 -0.13*** (0.02) 606,655 -0.07** (0.03) 468,280 0.004 (0.01) 1,912,563 -0.29*** (0.06) 742,966 -0.17*** (0.02) 897,777 -0.12*** (0.03) 829,534 -0.15** (0.08) 130,600 -0.03 (0.06) 413,392 0.007 (0.09) 716,388 Continuous treatment Standardized exposure × 1(τ ≥ 0) N Binary treatment 1(Exposure ≥ 0.1) × 1(τ ≥ 0) N Local projections with binary treatment Difference between pooled pre and post period N Note.

∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Column 1 presents the estimates for equation 27 for suppliers affected by the floods. Columns 2-5 present the results for equation 28 different outcomes of downstream firms. Column 6 presents a regression at the firm-product-time-event level using unit value of inputs as the outcome. In all cases, we restrict the post period to cover up to three months after each flood. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.

The top panel presents results for the standardized exposure. The middle panel presents the results for a binary treatment. For supplier sales the binary treatment is whether the supplier was affected by the flood or not. In columns 2-5 the binary treatment is whether the buyer exposure is more than 10 % of purchases. In column 6 the binary treatment is whether the buyer-product exposure is above 10% of purchases.

We present the local projections estimates in the bottom panel, where we compute the difference between the post and pre-treatment coefficients. We calculate standard errors for the difference using a bootstrap with 100 repetitions. Products and input prices. An advantage of our version of the firm-to-firm trade data is that it has detailed product codes and unit values.

This allows us to examine product-specific trades and changes in prices as a result of upstream suppliers being exposed to a shock. We first transform the data to the buyer-by-product-by-time level. Our specification is similar to Equation 28, but with a product dimension that allows us to include event-time, industry-district-product-time, and firm-by-product fixed effects, along with controls for pre-period firm-by-product sales interacted with time indicators.

In column 6 of Table B4, we study the evolution of product-specific prices for transactions that occur around the flood. While noisier, results are suggestive of a slight increase in price levels three months after the flood when using either the binary treatment or the local projections specification. viii New advances in two-way fixed effects methods.

Recent econometric advancements in two-way fixed effects methods point out that staggered treatment can lead to the negative weighting of certain disaggregated treatment effects (Goodman-Bacon, 2021). New methods developed by Borusyak et al. (2024); Callaway and Sant’Anna (2020); Sun and Abraham (2021) provide consistent and interpretable estimates. Yet, our setting offers some further challenges.

Our “treatment” turns “off” and “on” and perhaps “on” again, and our specifications control for various time-varying covariates, and a wide variety of other fixed effects, making some of these new advances challenging to apply in our setting. A new Local Projections Difference-in-Differences (LP-DID) estimator developed by Dube et al. (2023) allows us to recover interpretable estimates in a flexible and efficient manner.

We present the results from this LP-DID estimator in the bottom panel of Table B4, which show similar patterns. We further implement the LP-DID for the event study analysis as well. In Figure B3b, we once again reproduce the same pattern as before: downstream purchases fall for the first few months, and thereafter recover by month 4. The results from the LP-DID method qualitatively resemble our main results for all other outcomes as well.

Figure B3a shows the sales of affected suppliers, and Figure B3c contrasts existing vs. new suppliers. These patterns once again show that sales of affected suppliers fall, and that purchases from buyers decrease from both new and existing suppliers. Figure B3: LP-DID Event Studies (a) Sales of affected suppliers (b) Downstream purchases (c) Existing vs new suppliers Note. Event studies using the Local Projections Difference-in-Differences (LP-DID) approach, discussed in Dube et al. (2023).

Figure B3a includes event-time, industry-district-product-time, and firm-byproduct fixed effects, and controls for pre-period firm-by-product sales interacted with time indicators. Figure B3b and B3c include firm, time, event-time, and industry-district-real time fixed effects, and demand controls and log pre-period purchases-time controls. Standard errors clustered at the district level.

B.2 Dataset construction In Section 4.2, we use multiple sources to correlate our model implied probabilities with observables related to supply chain disruption risk. We consider five climate related measures: rainfall, coastal flooding, riverine flooding, temperature, and drought conditions. Our climate data is available for grid areas that are much more detailed than our 271 ix regions.

In such cases, we use shape files to overlay our regions to the available maps and calculate the average measure of the climate variables within each of our regions. Coastal and riverine flooding are taken from the World Resources Institute’s Aqueduct Floods Hazard Map. Historical flooding is defined as the present day meters of flooded areas. Projected flooding are the expected meters of increase in flooded areas expected in 2050. We use 10-year floods and the RCP 4.5 as our baseline projection.

Historical and projected temperature and drought data is taken from the IPCC WG1 Interactive Atlas. Historical temperatures are the average daily degrees centigrade in 2005 (the latest year available for historical data). Droughts are measured with the SPI index based on precipitation anomalies over the last 6 months. A lower SPI corresponds to more severe drought conditions.

Both temperature and SPI are observed monthly, and we take the average across 12 months to get a value for the gridcell in 2005. Projected data for 2050 is calculated assuming a risk scenario of RCP 4.5 and using a risk model of NOAA global circulation model and the Swedish Meterological and Hydrological Institute’s local circulation model. Daily rainfall data is taken from the India Meteorological Department and measured in millimeters.

We take the average across all days in 2019 for each district. For predicted rainfall, we first extract the average historical (measured in 2005) and predicted 2050 rainfall from the IPCC WG1 Interactive Atlas, using the same settings as for temperature. We then compute the change for each district between 2005 and 2050, and apply the implied yearly change to update the 2019 values to 2050.

The non climate variables mostly come from the Socioeconomic High-resolution RuralUrban Geographic Platform for India (SHRUG). Elevation is defined as the average elevation in meters of each district while terrain ruggedness is the Terrain Ruggedness Index expressing elevation differences between adjacent pixels. The nightlights luminosity index aims to capture economic activity by detailed regions.

Finally, court congestion is taken from the Development Data Lab and measures the average delay in days for the courts in each district.

C Theory Appendix C.1 Equilibrium Definition An equilibrium of this economy is a set of state-contingent consumption, {qi (ω, χ)}χ∈G(χ) ,  and final-good labor demand plans, ℓG i (ω, χ) χ∈G(χ) , intermediate goods producers labor  I demands, ℓi , an allocation of input orders, {Mji }j∈I,i∈I , and a vector of prices and  I wages, wi (χ), pG i (ω, χ), Pi (χ), pi i∈I,χ∈G(χ) such that: x 1. Given prices and wages, the representative consumer of each location maximizes its utility. 2.

Given prices and wages, firms in each location maximize expected profits. 3. Labor and goods Markets clear state by state Z I ℓG i (ω, χ) + ℓi = Li ∀i ∈ I, χ ∈ G(χ) ω∈[0,1] !1−β qi (ω, χ) = ϕi ℓG i (ω, χ) β X χj Mji ∀ω ∈ [0, 1] , i ∈ I, χ ∈ G(χ) j=1 X τij Mij = zi ℓIi ∀i j 4. Trade is balanced state by state X pM j τji Mji = j C.2 X pM i τij Mij ∀i ∈ I, χ ∈ G(χ) j Proofs Proposition 1: Proof.

Since the cost of materials is linear in Mji and the constraints are conventional (linear) non-negativity constraints, it suffices to show that the expected operating profits function Eχ (π(M i ; χ)) is concave in the vector M i . The expectation operator preserves the concavity of π(M i ; χ) which is the only thing required to prove. The concavity of ex-post profits, π(M i ; χ), follows from the parametric restric< 1. tion, (1−β)(σ−1) β+σ(1−β) Lemmas 1 and 2: Proof.

Conditional on some state of the world, χ, ex-post aggregate profits are given by, Z pi (ω; χ)qi (ω; χ) − wi (χ)ℓi (ω; χ) − πi (ω; χ)dω = ω∈[0,1] ! Z ω∈[0,1] X pM ji (χ)Mji (ω) dω. j Using the assumption of a unit mass of homogenous firms in a region, ex-post aggregate profits are then πi (χ) = pi (χ)qi (χ) − wi (χ)ℓi (χ) − X pM ji (χ)Mji .

j where pi (χ)qi (χ) corresponds to aggregate revenues from the final goods sector, wi (χ)ℓi (χ) P are payments to labor by final goods producers, and j pM ji (χ)Mji is total expenditure xi on intermediate inputs. As final goods firms are monopolistically competitive and the final goods aggregator is CES, standard algebra shows that revenues minus labor costs are a constant fraction of aggregate income: pi (χ)qi (χ) − wi (χ)ℓi (χ) = β + σ(1 − β) Yi (χ).

σ From goods market clearing and trade balance, it is easy to show that aggregate income is equal to the aggregate revenues of the final goods producers, Yi (ω) = pi (χ)qi (χ). Plugging this expression in the equation above, we get an aggregate labor demand equation as a function of wages and aggregate income, ℓi (χ) = β(σ − 1) Yi (χ) .

σ wi (χ) Turning to expenditure in intermediates inputs, multiplying the first order conditions defined in Equation 12 by Mji , and adding up across origins j, we obtain:   # (1−β)(σ−1) β+σ(1−β) " Eχ λi (χ) Θi (χ) X  − χj Mji X  = 0. pM ji (χ)Mji j∈I We can then plug the expression for Θi (χ) and for the stochastic discount factor λi (χ) = 1 to simplify the expression above as: Yi (χ)  Eχ 1 Yi (χ)  X (1 − β)(σ − 1) Yi (χ) − pM ji (χ)Mji σ  = 0.

Trade balance and zero profits for intermediate goods producers imply that P M pij (χ)Mij = wi (χ)ℓIi . Thus,  Eχ P M pji (χ)Mji =  (1 − β)(σ − 1) wi (χ) I − ℓ = 0. σ Yi (χ) i Imposing labor market clearing, it must be that ℓi (χ) + ℓIi = Li for all states of the world. Jointly, with the aggregate demand equation, it follows that Li − ℓIi = β(σ − 1) Yi (χ) , σ wi (χ) xii which in turn, implies that  Eχ  (1 − β)(σ − 1) β(σ − 1) ℓIi = 0 =⇒ ℓIi = (1 − β)Li − σ σ Li − ℓIi ∀i ∈ I, χ ∈ G(χ).

=⇒ ℓi (χ) = βLi This means that equilibrium aggregate profits are equal to πi (χ) = pi (χ)qi (χ) − wi (χ)ℓi (χ) − X pM ji (χ)Mji j β + σ(1 − β) σ wi (χ)ℓi (χ) − wi (χ)(1 − β)Li σ β(σ − 1)   β + σ(1 − β) = wi (χ)Li − (1 − β) σ−1 wi (χ)Li . = σ−1 = Finally, from the budget constraint, Yi (χ) = wi (χ)Li + πi (χ). Combining these expressions, we can show that σ Yi (χ) = wi (χ)Li . σ−1 Lemma 3: Proof. Let labor in region 1 be the numeraire.

We prove that wages in each location i, wi , are deterministic by showing that labor market clearing must occur at the time of producing intermediates. By backward induction, after intermediate inputs have been produced, final goods producers in each region face an inelastic residual labor supply equal to L̄i .

Aggregate labor demand in each region is given by,  β1   LD i (χ) =  ϕi Yi (χ)   , 1−β pi (χ) j∈I χj Mij P where final goods’ prices can be written as  β(σ − 1) pi (χ) = σ −β !−(1−β) ϕ−1 i X χj Mij wi (χ)β Yi (χ)1−β . j∈I If we plug the expression for prices, in the aggregate labor demand equation, and simplify xiii we get that, LD i (χ) = βLi Crucially, aggregate labor demand by final goods producers does not depend on the realization of the shocks, χ.

However to clear the labor market in each location the wage rate needs to be such that the residual labor supply that final goods’ producers face, L̄i , is equal to their inelastic labor demand. The wage rate is set ex-ante when intermediate good production takes place and is independent of the realization of the shocks. As a corollary, this implies that the wage rate, wi (χ), aggregate profits πi (χ) and aggregate income Yi (χ) are all deterministic.

C.3 Welfare In this appendix, we discuss the welfare implications of an alternative assumption on consumer preferences – a linear utility index over a standard CES consumption aggregator, and on firms’ behavior – maximizing expected profits, rather than owners’ value; two conventional assumptions in the trade literature.

Under these assumptions, consumers maximize the following objective function: Z max qi (ω, χ) qi (ω,χ) σ−1 σ σ  σ−1 dω ω∈[0,1] subject to the budget constraint, Z pi (ω, χ)qi (ω, χ) = Yi (χ) ≡ wi (χ)Li + Πi (χ) ∀χ ∈ G(χ), ω∈[0,1] whereas firms maximize the following ex-ante profits, # " max Eχ πi (Mi ; χ) − Mi ≥0 X pM ji Mji .

j∈I Since firms are purely expected profit maximizers, rather than expected consumer value maximizers in this setting, the relevant stochastic discount factor is excluded (with these preferences, the stochastic discount factor λi (χ) = Pi 1(χ) ). It can be shown that Proposition 1 and Lemmas 1-3 hold in this economy, and that the optimal sourcing bundle for each location i in this problem is exactly the same as in our baseline model in Section 3, as the resulting first order conditions coincide.

However, as a result of the different assumptions on the utility functions of the representative consumer, the expected welfare xiv for location i is given by:  Wi = Eχ [Qi (Mi ; χ)] = ϕi β β Lβi Eχ  !1−β  X χj Mji . (29) j As it is clear from this expression for welfare, even though consumers are risk neutral, the sourcing strategy selected by the final goods producers has effects on their welfare. Consumer also benefit from diversification in the firms’ sourcing strategies.

However, as this expression also shows, the curvature of this function with respect to the amount of inputs differs from the curvature in the firms’ profit function, which was given by (1−β)(σ−1) . This discrepancy in curvatures causes a disagreement between consumers and β+σ(1−β) firms in the optimal diversification.

To clarify this point, we reproduce below the firstorder conditions for input sourcing, for the social planner,  #−β  " (1 − β)αi β β ϕi Lβi Eχ χj X  ≤ pM ji ∀ j χj Mji j∈I with αi , an utility weight, and, pM ji a Lagrange multiplier, and for the firm, after incorporating the general equilibrium aggregates:  (1 − β)wi Li Eχ χj #−1  " X χj Mji  ≤ pM ji ∀ j. j∈I As these expressions show, as β < 1, in the model proposed in this appendix, there is excessive diversification in the competitive equilibrium relative to the planner’s solution.

An implication of this difference of the concavity of welfare and of profits in terms of input orders is that consumers value that firms diversify when this diversification is cheap, in particular, when firms can import inputs from other regions at a low cost. However, when trade costs increase, consumers would prefer to have less costly goods than less volatility, although firms still have incentives to source from other regions.

In terms of welfare, this makes consumers prefer autarky when trade costs increase, rather than having the likelihood of trading. This result arises from individual firms’ diversification choices, which do not take into account their impact on district prices, akin to an aggregate input demand externality. This could be corrected by adding the relevant stochastic discount factor to the firm problem, however this is not the convention in standard trade models.

The consumer/planner internalizes the impact on prices and therefore chooses less diversification. These results echo the findings in an older literature that in the presence of incomplete markets, the optimal decisions of profit-maximizing firms can differ from xv the optimal choices of their owners (the consumers) (see, e.g., Stiglitz (1972) or Dreze (1985)). We provide numerical evidence in a simplified setting for these countervailing forces in Appendix Figure C1.

In this figure, we are plotting welfare with costly trade relative to autarky’s welfare for a stylized model with two symmetric regions with independent disruption realizations. As the figures show, as trade costs decline, firms start sourcing from the other region. However, as firms have more incentives to diversify than socially optimal, they source from the other region even in the case that trade costs are very high, which ends up reducing the amount of total inputs they have for production.

Figure C1: Comparison between costly and free trade (a) Region 1 (b) Region 2 Note. This figure illustrates the welfare in Region 1 (left column), and Region 2 (right column) relative to autarky, as trade costs increase. Regions are symmetric in all their fundamentals including the probability of disruptions which is equal to 0.5. We complement this numerical analysis with a first order approximation of welfare around autarky in this stylized setting.

Due to symmetry, the wage in both locations can be normalized to 1, furthermore, we assume that the productivities and labor endowments in each location are also equal to 1.

The derivative of the expression for expected welfare in region 1 in Equation 29 with respect to τ is,    ∂M11 ∂M21 ∂W1 −β β = (1 − β)β Eχ (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 ) χ1 + χ2 ∂τ ∂τ ∂τ " " ∂M M τ ## 11 11 21 M21 τ χ1 ∂τ M11 τ + χ2 ∂M 1−β ∂τ M21 τ β = (1 − β)β Eχ (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 ) χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 i h (1 − β)β β = Eχ (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 )1−β [Λ11 (χ)EM11 ,τ + Λ12 (χ)EM21 ,τ ] τ where EMji ,τ is the elasticity of input orders from origin j in region i, Mji , with respect to τ and Λ11 (χ) and Λ12 (χ) are state-contingent input quantity-shares.

Thus, the elasticity xvi of welfare with respect to trade costs is, h i 1−β E (χ M + χ M ) [Λ (χ)E + Λ (χ)E ] χ 1 11 2 21 11 M11 ,τ 12 M21 ,τ ∂ ln W1 h i = (1 − β) ∂ ln τ Eχ (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 )1−β (30) This expression can be simplified by using that aggregate expenditure in materials is equal to (1 − β). Thus, Mii + τ Mji = 1 − β, and after taking the derivative with respect to τ is equal to ∂Mii ∂Mii + Mji + τ = 0.

∂τ ∂τ Using this expression, one can write an equation that relates elasticities and input order shares, Sii (τ ) EMji ,τ = −1 − EMii ,τ × , Sji (τ ) τM ji ii and Sii (τ ) = MiiM+M . Plugging this relationship with input value-shares Sji (τ ) = Mii +M ji ji between the elasticities in Equation 30, we get, h 1−β h  ) Λ11 (χ) − SSjiii (τ Λ (χ) (τ ) 12 Eχ (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 ) EM11 ,τ ∂ ln W1 h i = (1 − β) 1−β ∂ ln τ Eχ (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 )  ii − Λ12 (χ) .

We explore the limit of this elasticity when the economy approaches to autarky. Denote by τ ∗ , the choke trade cost, at which autarky becomes the equilibrium outcome. This trade cost exists due to the perfect substitutability between inputs of the different origins. All the limits of this elasticity are trivial, except, lim∗ τ →τ M11 χ2 M21 1 χ2 Sii (τ ) Λ12 (χ) = lim∗ = ∗ .

τ →τ τ M21 χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 Sji (τ ) τ χ1 Then, the autarky limit for this elasticity is h lim∗ τ →τ Eχ ∂ ln W1 (1 − β) ∗ = E M ,τ 11 ∂ ln τ τ∗ χ1−β 1  h τ ∗ − χχ21 Eχ χ1−β 1 i i , which only depends on the choke trade cost, the elasticity of the own-input to τ in the autarky limit, the intermediate inputs’ share in production and features of the distribution of disruptions.

Finally, we simplify this expression further by computing the value of the xvii demand elasticity as the economy converges to autarky. We compute this term by using the first order conditions for the firms’ sourcing problem in this stylized economy,   Eχ χ1 (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 )−1 = 1   Eχ χ2 (χ1 M11 + χ2 M21 )−1 = τ, and we apply the implicit function theorem to derive the following expression for the elasticity in autarky, h i ∗ Eχ χ2 χ1 χ χ1 h i ∗ Eχ χ2 χ1 τ ∂M11 τ h i h i τ ∗.

= (1 − β) = EM11 ,τ ∗ = ∗ ∂τ M11 V χ2 (1 − β) V χ2 χ χ1 Using the expression above to simplify the elasticity of welfare with trade costs in the autarky limit gives us, h i h  i 1−β χ2 ∗ Eχ Eχ χ1 τ − χ1 ∂ ln W1 h i h i . lim∗ = (1 − β) τ →τ ∂ ln τ Vχ χχ21 Eχ χ1−β 1 χ2 χ1 Lastly, it canh beishown that in this simplified setting, that the choke trade cost is equal to τ ∗ = Eχ χχ21 , guaranteeing, that the last term is positive.

Thus, as this limit is always positive, in this model, as the economy approaches to autarky, expected welfare increases. C.4 Additional Results: Comparative Statics In this Appendix, we present other comparatve statics both with regions on a line and equidistant regions. We consider no risk, as a benchmark. We then complement the homogeneous risk and heterogeneous distance discussion in Section 3 with the analysis for homogeneous risk and homogeneous distance.

Turning to heterogeneous risk, we complement the main discussion by illustrating the case of heterogeneous risk and distance. We then compare this case to autarky, and heterogeneous risk to free trade. No risk. Figure C2 illustrates the sourcing shares and expected real wages when ρ = 0 for all regions. With identical fundamentals and positive trade costs, it is optimal for every firm to source all inputs domestically within its own region. This is true regardless of geography.

Figure C2a illustrates the diagonal terms are 1, i.e., within-region sourcing shares are 1 for all regions, and cross-region sourcing shares are zero. The figure also makes clear that expected real wages are equalized across all regions under both geographies. xviii This setting benchmarks our model relative to typical trade and spatial models where there is no sourcing risk.

As all regions are identical and inputs are perfectly substitutable, there are no gains from trade, and the equilibrium is regional autarky. In particular, the contrast between equidistant regions and regions on a line does not change either sourcing shares or regional real wages. There is no role for geography in the equilibrium with no risk and positive trade costs. Figure C2: Scenario with no risk (a) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (b) Real Wages (c) Real Wages Note.

Panel A shows the 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are in the vertical axis and the supplying regions are in the horizontal axis. Each row represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying region from each (column) supplying region.

In the scenario with no risk, the sourcing shares in Panel A are the sourcing shares for the geographies in Panels B and C. Panels B and C present the real wages for each region, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space. In Panel B, regions are equidistant from each other. In Panel C, regions are in a straight line, implying that the regions have different distances from each other. Homogeneous risk, homogeneous distance.

Figure C3 illustrates the bilateral sourcing shares when the risk of shocks in each region is ρ = 0.5. Firms now face a trade-off: as shocks are independent across regions, they can reduce the probability of input disruptions by sourcing from multiple regions. On the other hand, sourcing from other regions is costly, given trade costs. As a result, firms still largely source inputs from their own regions, but also diversify by sourcing some inputs other regions.

In contrast to the case with heterogeneous distance discussed in Section 3, firms diversify much less overall. There is no geographic variation in expected real wages or in sourcing patterns with equidistant regions. Heterogeneous risk, heterogeneous distance. The left panel of Figure C4 illustrate the regional maps and the shock probabilities of each region in the heterogeneous risk case under heterogeneous distance. The middle panel shows the bilateral sourcing shares between regions.

The diagonal is again the darkest: in the presence of trade costs, all regions source most of their inputs from their own region despite heterogeneous risk. However, there is clear variation. Regions 1 and 3 (the safest regions), see the most “own sourcing.” The riskiest region 2 diversifies the most, particularly when it is more geographically central.

All regions source inputs from other regions, with relatively larger xix Figure C3: Scenario with homogeneous risk (a) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (b) Real Wages Note. The figures in the left panel consist of a 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are in the vertical axis and the supplying regions are in the horizontal axis. Each line represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying region from each supplying region (column).

The figures in the right panels present the real wages for each region, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space. The scales are shown to the right of each figure. shares from those with low risk. Geography plays an important role too, with relatively more sourcing from risky region 2 when it is more central, in contrast to the homogeneous risk case in Section 3.

The right panel shows again that expected real wages across regions are negatively correlated with the risk of shocks, and are highest in safest locations despite identical regional fundamentals. The underlying mechanisms at work are that safer regions experience higher labor demand for their intermediate inputs from all regions, pushing up nominal wages. They also face a lower price index of their final goods, as they can source safer “domestic” inputs without paying trade costs.

Notice that in general equilibrium, the wage impacts on riskier regions will modulate sourcing from them. As a result, when the regions are on a line and trade costs to the risky region are low, its equilibrium real wages are slightly higher than in the equidistant setting.

Importantly, under our assumption that inputs are perfect substitutes, and that regions have identical fundamentals, there is no source of traditional gains from trade either through comparative advantage or increasing varieties. The incentives for trade here arise entirely to mitigate risk, with strong spatial general equilibrium implications for wages and prices. We will return to this point below, when evaluating the welfare gains from supplier diversification.

Comparison between homogeneous and heterogeneous risk cases. Figure C5 compares the expected real wages and their variance between the homogeneous and heterogeneous risk cases. The left panels show the ratio of expected real wages, and the xx Figure C4: Scenario with heterogeneous risk Different distance between regions (a) Shock Probabilities (b) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (c) Real Wages Note.

The figure in the left panel shows the probability that each region is hit by a shock, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space. The figure in the middle panel consists of a 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are in the vertical axis and the supplying regions are in the horizontal axis. Each line represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying regions from each supplying region. The right panel presents the real wages for each region.

The scales are shown to the right of each figure. right panels show the ratio of their variance. As is immediately clear, the riskiest region 2 has the largest declines in its expected real wages as we move from homogeneous to heterogeneous risk under both geographies, while the safest regions 1 and 3 have lower expected real wages under homogeneous risk.

The right panels of the figure show that the safer regions see an increase in the variance of their expected real wages in the heterogeneous risk case relative to the homogeneous risk. This is despite their disruption probability decreasing when moving to heterogeneous risk. While they face less volatility from their own shocks, they diversify when risk is heterogeneous and source more from relatively riskier regions.

The riskiest region 2 sees an decline in the variance of real wages when moving to heterogeneous risk, because it mitigates volatility by sourcing from safer regions. This decline is larger when region 2 is more central, and faces lower trade costs for diversification. Heterogeneous risk and autarky. We next maintain the heterogeneous risk and distance across regions but raise trade costs to infinity, shutting down inter-regional input sourcing.

Figure C6 illustrates that while the probabilities of shocks remain the same as the heterogeneous risk with trade case above, bilateral sourcing mimics the no-risk case. However, the impact on expected real wages is very different. The riskiest region sees the lowest expected real wages, while the safest regions see the highest expected real wages, as they have the lowest expected prices due to the lowest shock probabilities and fully domestic sourcing.

Similar results hold in the homogeneous distance case, as in autarky, regional geography has no impact on regional outcomes. xxi Figure C5: Comparison between homogeneous and heterogeneous risk cases Panel A: Same distance between regions (a) Expected Real Wages Ratio (b) Variance of Real Wages Ratio Panel B: Different distance between regions (c) Expected Real Wages Ratio (d) Variance of Real Wages Ratio Note.

In this figure we plot the expected real wages (left panel) and variance of real wages (right panel) for the homogeneous case shown in Figure 3 relative to the heterogeneous case shown in Figure 4. The variance of real wages is computed across potential states of the world. For the top panels, regions are equidistant from each other. In the bottom panels, regions are in a straight line, such that the regions have different distances between each other.

The scales are shown to the right of each figure. Welfare comparison between costly trade and autarky with heterogeneous and heterogeneous distance risk cases. We next consider how expected real wages change across regions moving from costly trade to autarky with heterogeneous distance in Figure C7. Again, all regions see a decline in expected real wages moving to trade from autarky.

The intuition is that in this setting, there are no “conventional” gains from trade, as there is no comparative advantage or gains from variety. The primary reason for trade here is for risk diversification. However, trade is costly, so the benefits of diversification are obtained at a higher average input price, raising regional price indices and lowering expected real wages under costly trade.

The smallest decline in real wages is for the central high-risk region 2, which pays the least in trade costs for diversification. It also has the lowest expected real wages in both the costly trade scenario and autarky scenarios.

xxii Figure C6: Scenario with heterogeneous risk and infinite trade costs Panel A: Different distance between regions (a) Shock probabilities (b) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (c) Real Wages Panel B: Same distance between regions (d) Shock probabilities (e) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (f) Real Wages Note. This figure presents the case where trade costs are set to infinity.

The figures in the left panel show the probability that each region is hit by a shock, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space. The figures in the middle panel consist of a 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are in the vertical axis and the supplying regions are in the horizontal axis. Each line represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying regions from each supplying region.

The right panels presents the expected real wages for each region. The scales are shown to the right of each figure. In Panel A, regions vary in their distance and are located on a line. The case with equidistant regions is shown in Panel B. While the diversification motive for trade does not increase expected real wages in this comparative static, Panel B of the figure illustrates that the variance in real wages increases sharply, moving to costly trade from autarky for all regions.

Supply chain diversification lowers the variance in final goods prices across all regions, insuring against shocks and real wage volatility. Again, the riskiest region 2 sees the largest increase in the variance of expected real wages when trade is barred.

Section 3 showed the same insight holds with equidistant regions: regional geography primarily modulates sourcing patterns via trade, but does not otherwise play a role in the mechanisms underlying the relative decline in real wages, given the disruption probabilities and trade costs, and increase in their variance moving from costly trade to autarky. Heterogeneous risk and free trade.

Under free trade, firms can diversify their input risk at lower costs – the trade-off is only that inputs in lower-risk regions will be more costly in equilibrium as those regions will see higher expected real wages.

With the same fundamentals across regions and free trade, in equilibrium, every firm in every region xxiii Figure C7: Comparison between heterogeneous risk under costly trade and autarky Different distance between regions (a) Expected Real Wages Ratio (b) Variance of Real Wages Ratio Note.

In this figure we plot the expected real wages (left panel) and variance of real wages (right panel) for the scenario with heterogeneous risk and costly trade shown in Figure 4 relative to the scenario with heterogeneous risk and trade autarky shown in Figure C6. The variance of real wages is computed across potential states of the world. Here, regions are in a straight line, such that the regions have different distances between each other. The scales are shown to the right of each figure.

The case with equidistant regions is shown in Figure 5. has the same optimal sourcing strategy. The middle panel of Figure C8 illustrates these sourcing shares. The left panel illustrates that sourcing concentrates in the safest location, regions 1 and 3, pushing up real wages there. Under free trade, regional geography plays no role in these patterns, and sourcing shares and expected real wages are the same as in this case when regions are equidistant.

Welfare comparison between costly and free trade with heterogeneous risk. Panel A of Figure C9 illustrates that in contrast to costly trade, all regions see higher expected real wages under free trade. This is due to the lower costs of inputs, both from risk diversification and the lack of trade costs. The largest increases in expected real wages moving from costly to free trade are in the risky region 2.

This region sees increases in sourcing from all regions as firms no longer face high trade costs to access the region’s higher risk inputs, and so its equilibrium wage does not need to decline as much as the case with costly trade. Panel B illustrates that moving from costly to free trade also lowers the variance of expected real wages across all regions. Thus, under free trade, there is no trade-off between higher expected real wages and lower volatility.

Similar insights hold when regions are equidistant in the lower panel. xxiv Figure C8: Scenario with heterogeneous risk and free trade Panel A: Different distance between regions (a) Shock Probabilities (b) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (c) Real Wages Panel B: Same distance between regions (d) Shock probabilities (e) Bilateral Sourcing Shares (f) Real Wages Note. This figure presents the case where there are no trade costs.

The figured in the left panel show the probability that each region is hit by a shock, as well as a visual representation of the geographical location of regions in space. The figures in the middle panel consist of a 3x3 input-output matrix where the buying regions are in the vertical axis and the supplying regions are in the horizontal axis. Each line represents the share of inputs purchased by a buying regions from each supplying region. The right panels present the real wages for each region.

The scales are shown to the right of each figure. Panel A illustrates the case where regions are on a line, and Panel B illustrates the case when regions are equidistant from each other. xxv Figure C9: Comparison between costly and free trade Panel A: Different distance between regions (a) Expected Real Wages Ratio (b) Variance of Real Wages Ratio Panel B: Equidistant regions (c) Expected Real Wages Ratio (d) Variance of Real Wages Ratio Note.

In this figure we plot the expected real wages (left panel) and variance of real wages (right panel) for the scenario with heterogeneous risk and costly trade shown in Figure 4 relative to the scenario with heterogeneous risk and free trade shown in Figure C8. The variance of real wages is computed across potential states of the world. In Panel A, regions are in a straight line, such that the regions have different distances between each other. The case with equidistant regions is in Panel B.

The scales are shown to the right of each figure. xxvi C.5 Inventories - descriptive evidence In Section B.1.2, we made the point that our baseline model without inventories estimates that a 1% decrease in purchases implies a 0.47% decline in sales, which is close to the value estimated in the data of a 0.43% decline in sales.

This is suggestive that while firms might use strategies other than multi-sourcing to protect themselves from shocks, we can approximate the overall impact on sales without explicitly incorporating other channels. We proceed to investigate how important inventory holdings are in India, to understand whether they are an important feature to account for.

While we do not observe inventory holding directly in our data, we compute measures of inventories at the product level using two alternative approaches. First, we use the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for 201415 to compute, for each HSN-4 product, the average months of inventory held by firms in the survey. We divide the closing value of finished goods by the average monthly sales to measure average inventory levels in terms of how many months of sales they account for.

Second, we use our transaction data to compute what is the average gap in terms of months between two consecutive purchases of each HSN-4 product. Intuitively, products that are purchased on average with larger gaps will have more accumulated inventories that those with more frequent purchases. A first thing to note is that the levels of inventories for most products in the data are quite low.

According to the average months of inventory held from the ASI, the mean across products in 0.91 months of inventory. The 75th percentile is 0.96, which reinforces that for most product, firms hold less than one months of inventory. In Figure C10, we correlate both measures with the fraction of firms that multisource a given HSN-4 product computed from our transaction data.

As shown in the figure, both measures show that there is no correlation between how much a product is multi-sourced and the level of inventory holdings. While inventories might be a relevant strategy for some products, they don’t seem to be substitutes or complements to multi-sourcing for our firms. xxvii Figure C10: Product-level inventories and multisourcing, by product (a) Avg months of inventory held (b) Avg months between purchases Note.

In both figures, the horizontal axis plots the share of firms that we observe sourcing a product from at least two suppliers during 2019. In the left panel, the vertical axis measures the average months of inventories held for each product, as computed from the ASI. The vertical axis in the right panel, computes for each product the average number of months between consecutive purchases as measured from our transaction data.

D Quantitative Appendix D.1 Model Probabilities - Additional Analysis Figure D1: Model probabilities, Productivities and Distance (a) Prob vs Productivities (b) Prob v Average Distance Note. In this figure, we plot the estimated probabilities against some observables. In the left panel, we correlate the probabilities with Log(Productivities). In the right panel, we correlate the probabilities with the average distance to the state of our study.

xxviii Figure D2: Model Probabilities and Projected Observables (a) Average Daily Rainfall - (b) Coastal Flooding - Pro- (c) Riverine Flooding - ProProjected 2050 jected 2050 jected 2050 . (d) Standardized Precipation (e) Average Temperature Index - Projected 2050 Projected 2050 Note. In this figure, we plot the estimated probabilities against 2050 projections for climate observables.

In Figures D2a and D2e, we correlate the rainfall and temperature projections for year 2050 with the recovered probabilities. Figures D2b use the projected coastal flooding, while Figures D2c correlate the probabilities with projected riverine flooding, respectively. A more detailed definition of each of the variables can be found in Appendix D.1. Figure D3: Model Probabilities, Price Indices and Wages (a) Price Index (b) Real Wage Variance Note.

In this figure, we plot the model-derived price index (left panel) and real wage variance (right panel) against the estimated disruption probabilities. xxix Figure D4: Ahmadabad sourcing, Kolkata sourcing – Free Trade Note. In this figure, we plot model sourcing shares with Free Trade for Ahmadabad district (left panel) and Kolkata district (right panel). Figure D5: Counterfactuals: Change in Precipitation and Flood Only (a) ∆ in Probabilities (b) ∆ in Expected Welfare Note.

In this figure, we plot the change in probabilities when average rainfall, coastal flooding and riverine flooding change as projected, but the other climate variables are held constant (left panel), and the corresponding change in welfare (right panel). xxx Figure D6: Counterfactuals: Change in Temperature and SPI Risk Only (a) ∆ in Probabilities (b) ∆ in Welfare Note.

In this figure, we plot the change in probabilities when temperature and SPI change as projected, but the other climate variables are held constant (left panel), and the corresponding change in welfare (right panel). xxxi E Alternative Models In this appendix we consider two alternative models. First, we model risk probabilities using observables in Appendix E.1.

Second we consider a CES aggregator of inputs in Appendix E.2 E.1 Projecting Probabilities on Observables In this model, we describe an alternative estimation strategy for the disruption probabilities, ρi . Instead of computing one parameter per region, we parameterize the vector {ρi }Ii=1 on a vector of observable characteristics, Zi .

This vector Zi includes a constant term, average court delays, ruggedness, elevation, night lights, average rainfall, average coastal flooding, average riverine flooding, and average temperature. We include all of these variables in logs, and we add a dummy for the case in which historical coastal flooding is positive, to allow the function to allow the function to flexibly estimate the asymptotic behavior of the log at 0.

Then, we assume that these probabilities have the following functional form, ′ eZi γ ρi = ′ , 1 + eZi γ where γ is the vector of parameters that we estimate. We estimate this by minimizing the gap between model-implied and the observed average sourcing shares in the data. In Table E1, we present the estimates of the vector γ. The resulting probabilities from this approach are shown in Panel (c) of Figure 6.

This estimation approach requires estimating fewer parameters than our baseline, but necessitates that we take a stance on the sources of district-level risk. While the estimation approaches are independent of each other, the estimated coefficients for rainfall, flooding and temperature are positive, consistent with the baseline. Nightlights have a zero coefficient, also consistent with the baseline.

In contrast to the baseline, however, courts also contribute positively to risk under this approach.

Table E1: Estimates of the Model for the Probabilities Constant Courts Ruggedness Elevation -1.20 0.01 1.18 0.08 γ E.2 Night Rainfall Coastal Lights Flooding 0.00 0.19 0.27 Coastal Dummy Riverine Flooding Temperature 0.08 0.07 0.82 A Model with Finite Elasticity Across Inputs In this Appendix, we develop a model in which we relax the assumption of perfect substitution of inputs across different regions by allowing for a finite elasticity of substitution, xxxii Figure E7: Estimated Disruption Probabilities for Alternative Models (a) Parameterized Risk (b) Finite Elasticity Model-Implied Risk Note.

In this figure, we plot the model-implied district-level disruption probabilities for the alternative models. The left panel plots the district-level disruption probabilities implied by the parameterized approach outlined in the text. The right panel shows the district-level disruption probabilities obtained by following the same approach as in the baseline model, but allowing a finite elasticity of substitution across inputs of different origins. The scales are shown to the right of each figure.

akin to an Armington model. In this model, firms will have two incentives to source input varieties from different regions. The first one is the diversification motive, which is the main focus of this paper. The second incentive corresponds to love for variety. The only modification to the model in Section 3 is to allow for imperfect substitution in the aggregator of inputs in Equation 6. Thus, the expression becomes: xi (ω) = X ε−1 ε xj ε ! ε−1 .

j∈I Since this assumption is just changing the way that the received input units are aggregated, the ex-post problem of the firm remains unchanged. Profits as a function of the total number of inputs the firm has are: 1  β+σ(1−β)  ε (1−β)(σ−1)  ε−1 β(1−σ)   ε−1  σ−1  X  σ−1  ϕi   [χj Mji ] ε  , πi (Mi ; χ) = κwiβ+σ(1−β)    Yi Pi   j∈I where κ = h σ(1−β)+β β(σ−1) ih β(σ−1) σ σ i β+σ(1−β) .

The sourcing problem of the firm is to choose Mij xxxiii to maximize expected profits minus order costs  1  β+σ(1−β)  ε (1−β)(σ−1)  ε−1   X β(1−σ)   ε−1  σ−1  X    σ−1 ε    Y P [χ M ] pM max Eχ κwiβ+σ(1−β)  ϕ −   i j ji j Mji , i i   Mij ≥0     j∈I j∈I (31) with first order condition,  Eχ χj Θi " X ε−1 # −ε+β+σ(1−β) β+σ(1−β)  1 (χj Mji )− ε  ≤ pIj .

(χj Mji ) ε j∈I In this particular model due to an Inada condition, the solution will be interior, and is implicitly given by:  −1 " ε−1 Mji ε Eχ χj ε Θi X −ε+β+σ(1−β)  # (ε−1)(β+σ(1−β)) ε−1  = pIj (χj Mji ) ε j∈I (pIj )−ε Mji = ε−1 ε Eχ χj Θi hP j∈I (χj Mji ) ε−1 ε −ε+β+σ(1−β) i (ε−1)(β+σ(1−β)) !−ε and can be simplied after plugging in the GE components to ε ε Mji = (1 − β) (wi Li ) (pIj )−ε  i −ε .

ε−1 hP ε−1 −1 ε ε Eχ χj j∈I (χj Mji ) where Θi = (1 − β)wi Li X [χj Mji ] ε−1 ε ε (1−β)(σ−1) !− ε−1 β+σ(1−β) j∈I Notice that we cannot derive a closed-form solution for this expression, we can only define it implicitly, and solve for the demand of inputs numerically. Proposition 2 The ex-ante profit function described in Equation 31 is concave in orders of inputs Mji . Proof.

Since the cost of materials is linear in Mij and the constraints are conventional (linear) non-negativity constraints, it suffices to show that the expected operating profits xxxiv function Eχ (π(M ; χ)) is concave in the vector M . The expectation operator preserves the concavity of π(M ; χ) which is the only thing required to prove. The concavity of the CES aggregator follows from the fact that it is a quasi-concave function that is homogeneous of degree 1.

The concavity of ex-post profits, π(M ; χ), follows from the < 1, as the composition of concave functions is concave. parametric restriction, (1−β)(σ−1) β+σ(1−β) E.3 Quantitative Implications Table E2 summarizes the baseline and counterfactuals in the two alternative models. The insights are very similar to the baseline model in Section 4. In both models, autarky is welfare decreasing, though there is spatial heterogeneity.

In the CES model, autarky decreases welfare by two orders of magnitude more on average, because autarky additionally implies losses from variety as only own-region inputs can be used to produce. Free trade is welfare improving in both models. Interestingly, the implications of climate risk changing are extremely similar in both models, despite their independent estimation and varied structure.

On average welfare decreases by 2% in the climate counterfactual in both models (contrast to 2.01% in the baseline). The fraction of districts with real wage declines is somewhat larger in the CES model, at 86.35%, than in the projected probabilities model, at 54.98%. Table E2: Model Counterfactuals: Summary – Alternative Models Counterfactual ∆ in Welfare ∆ in log Expected Real Wages ∆ in Real Wage Volatility % districts Avg. change Range Avg. change Range Avg.

change Range Real wage declines Parameterized Risk Baseline risk Autarky Free Trade -6.79 7.40 3.75 2.32 2.54 4.96 1.31 1.57 7.14 -2.42 5.97 1.32 2.58% 0.00% Alternative risk Climate change -2.00 4.68 -2.12 4.67 -0.02 0.11 54.98% Finite Elasticity of Substitution Across Inputs Baseline risk Autarky Free Trade -198.96 15.33 42.01 1.08 -186.83 15.33 43.34 1.07 11.87 4.25 3.71 2.45 100.00% 0.00% Alternative risk Climate change -2.00 2.71 -1.96 2.71 0.03 0.00 86.35% Note.

This table shows statistics of the distribution of percentage changes between the baseline scenario with current climate risk and costly trade and other scenarios, weighted by district population. Range refers to the interquartile range. xxxv Figure E8: Counterfactuals: Climate Risk Increase – Alternative Models Parameterized Risk Profile (a) ∆ in Probabilities (b) ∆ in Welfare Finite Elasticity of Substitution Across Inputs (c) ∆ in Probabilities (d) ∆ in Welfare Note.

In this figure, we plot the change in probabilities of climate risk (Panel A), and the change in welfare (Panel B) for the model with parameterized risk. In Panel C and Panel D, we plot the change in probabilities of climate, and the change in welfare for the model with a finite elasticity of substitution. xxxvi

Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and socioeconomic impacts Could climate become the weak link in your supply chain? Case study August 2020 McKinsey Global Institute Since its founding in 1990, the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) has sought to develop a deeper understanding of the evolving global economy.

As the business and economics research arm of McKinsey & Company, MGI aims to provide leaders in the commercial, public, and social sectors with the facts and insights on which to base management and policy decisions. MGI research combines the disciplines of economics and management, employing the analytical tools of economics with the insights of business leaders.

Our “micro-to-macro” methodology examines microeconomic industry trends to better understand the broad macroeconomic forces affecting business strategy and public policy. MGI’s in-depth reports have covered more than 20 countries and 30 industries. Current research focuses on six themes: productivity and growth, natural resources, labor markets, the evolution of global financial markets, the economic impact of technology and innovation, and urbanization.

Recent reports have assessed the digital economy, the impact of AI and automation on employment, income inequality, the productivity puzzle, the economic benefits of tackling gender inequality, a new era of global competition, Chinese innovation, and digital and financial globalization. MGI is led by three McKinsey & Company senior partners: James Manyika, Sven Smit, and Jonathan Woetzel. James and Sven also serve as co-chairs of MGI.

Michael Chui, Susan Lund, Anu Madgavkar, Jan Mischke, Sree Ramaswamy, Jaana Remes, Jeongmin Seong, and Tilman Tacke are MGI partners, and Mekala Krishnan is an MGI senior fellow. Project teams are led by the MGI partners and a group of senior fellows and include consultants from McKinsey offices around the world. These teams draw on McKinsey’s global network of partners and industry and management experts.

The MGI Council is made up of leaders from McKinsey offices around the world and the firm’s sector practices and includes Michael Birshan, Andrés Cadena, Sandrine Devillard, André Dua, Kweilin Ellingrud, Tarek Elmasry, Katy George, Rajat Gupta, Eric Hazan, Acha Leke, Gary Pinkus, Oliver Tonby, and Eckart Windhagen. The Council members help shape the research agenda, lead high-impact research and share the findings with decision makers around the world.

In addition, leading economists, including Nobel laureates, advise MGI research. The partners of McKinsey fund MGI’s research; it is not commissioned by any business, government, or other institution. For further information about MGI and to download reports for free, please visit www.mckinsey.com/mgi.

In collaboration with McKinsey & Company's Sustainability and Global Risk practicies McKinsey & Company’s Sustainability Practice helps businesses and governments reduce risk, manage disruption, and capture opportunities in the transition to a low-carbon, sustainable-growth economy.

Clients benefit from our integrated, systemlevel perspective across industries from energy and transport to agriculture and consumer goods and across business functions from strategy and risk to operations and digital technology. Our proprietary research and tech-enabled tools provide the rigorous fact base that business leaders and government policy makers need to act boldly with confidence.

The result: cutting-edge solutions that drive business-model advances and enable lasting performance improvements for new players and incumbents alike. www.mckinsey.com/sustainability McKinsey & Company’s Global Risk Practice partners with clients to go beyond managing risk to enhancing resilience and creating value. Organizations today face unprecedented levels and types of risk produced by a diversity of new sources.

These include technological advances bringing cybersecurity threats and rapidly evolving model and data risk; external shifts such as unpredictable geopolitical environments and climate change; and an evolving reputational risk landscape accelerated and amplified by social media. We apply deep technical expertise, extensive industry insights, and innovative analytical approaches to help organizations build risk capabilities and assets across a full range of risk areas.

These include financial risk, capital and balance sheet–related risk, nonfinancial risks (including cyber, data privacy, conduct risk, and financial crime), compliance and controls, enterprise risk management and risk culture, model risk management, and crisis response and resiliency—with a center of excellence for transforming risk management through the use of advanced analytics. www.mckinsey.com/ business-functions/risk Could climate become the weak link in your supply chain?

Case study August 2020 Authors Jonathan Woetzel, Shanghai Dickon Pinner, San Francisco Hamid Samandari, New York Hauke Engel, Frankfurt Mekala Krishnan, Boston Claudia Kampel, Stuttgart Jakob Graabak, Oslo 4 Introduction to case studies In January 2020, the McKinsey Global Institute published Climate risk and response: Physical hazards and socioeconomic impacts.

In that report, we measured the impact of climate change by the extent to which it could affect human beings, human-made physical assets, and the natural world. We explored risks today and over the next three decades and examined specific cases to understand the mechanisms through which climate change leads to increased socioeconomic risk. This is one of our case studies, focused on supply chains.

We investigated cases that cover a range of sectors and geographies and provide the basis of a “micro-to-macro” approach that is a characteristic of McKinsey Global Institute research. To inform our selection of cases, we considered over 30 potential combinations of climate hazards, sectors, and geographies based on a review of the literature and expert interviews on the potential direct impacts of physical climate hazards.

We found these hazards affect five different key socioeconomic systems: livability and workability, food systems, physical assets, infrastructure services, and natural capital. We ultimately chose nine cases to reflect these systems and based on their exposure to the extremes of climate change and their proximity today to key physiological, human-made, and ecological thresholds (Exhibit 1). As such, these cases represent leading-edge examples of climate change risk.

Each case is specific to a geography and an exposed system, and thus is not representative of an “average” environment or level of risk across the world.

Our cases show that the direct risk from climate hazards is determined by the severity of the hazard and its likelihood, the exposure of various “stocks” of capital (people, physical capital, and natural capital) to these hazards, and the resilience of these stocks to the hazards (for example, the ability of physical assets to withstand flooding).

We typically define the climate state today as the average conditions between 1998 and 2017, in 2030 as the average between 2021 and 2040, and in 2050 between 2041 and 2060. Through our case studies, we also assess the knock-on effects that could occur, for example to downstream sectors or consumers. We primarily rely on past examples and empirical estimates for this assessment of knock-on effects, which is likely not exhaustive given the complexities associated with socioeconomic systems.

Through this “micro” approach, we offer decision makers a methodology by which to assess direct physical climate risk, its characteristics, and its potential knock-on impacts. Climate science makes extensive use of scenarios ranging from lower (Representative Concentration Pathway 2.6) to higher (RCP 8.5) CO2 concentrations. We have chosen to focus on RCP 8.5, because the higher-emission scenario it portrays enables us to assess physical risk in the absence of further decarbonization.

Such an “inherent risk” assessment allows us to understand the magnitude of the challenge and highlight the case for action. (We also choose a sea level rise scenario for one of our cases that is consistent with the RCP 8.5 trajectory). Our case studies cover each of the five systems we assess to be directly affected by physical climate risk, across geographies and sectors.

While climate change Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 5 will have an economic impact across many sectors, our cases highlight the impact on construction, agriculture, finance, fishing, tourism, manufacturing, real estate, and a range of infrastructure-based sectors.

The cases include the following: — For livability and workability, we look at the risk of exposure to extreme heat and humidity in India and what that could mean for that country’s urban population and outdoor-based sectors, as well as at the changing Mediterranean climate and how that could affect sectors such as wine and tourism.

— For food systems, we focus on the likelihood of a multiple-breadbasket failure affecting wheat, corn, rice, and soy, as well as, specifically in Africa, the impact on wheat and coffee production in Ethiopia and cotton and corn production in Mozambique.

— For physical assets, we look at the potential impact of storm surge and tidal flooding on Florida real estate and the extent to which global supply chains, including for semiconductors and rare earths, could be vulnerable to the changing climate. — For infrastructure services, we examine 17 types of infrastructure assets, including the potential impact on coastal cities such as Bristol in England and Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam.

— Finally, for natural capital, we examine the potential impacts of glacial melt and runoff in the Hindu Kush region of the Himalayas; what ocean warming and acidification could mean for global fishing and the people whose livelihoods depend on it; as well as potential disturbance to forests, which cover nearly one-third of the world’s land and are key to the way of life for 2.4 billion people.

6 McKinsey Global Institute Ex Exh hib ibit it 1 We have selected nine case studies of leading-edge climate change impacts across all major geographies, sectors, and affected systems. 7 2 5 1 4 Global case studies Heat stress1 Low Livability and workability Food systems Physical assets Infrastructure services Natural capital High 3 8 7 6 9 Highest drought risk in 20502 Increase in hurricane/cyclone severity 1 Will India get too hot to work? 2 A Mediterranean basin without a Mediterranean climate?

3 Will the world’s breadbaskets become less reliable? 4 How will African farmers adjust to changing patterns of precipitation? 5 Will mortgages and markets stay afloat in Florida? 6 Could climate become the weak link in your supply chain? 7 Can coastal cities turn the tide on rising flood risk? 8 Will infrastructure bend or break under climate stress? 9 Reduced dividends on natural capital? 1. Heat stress measured in wet-bulb temperatures. 2.

Drought risk defined based on time in drought according to Palmer Drought Severity index (PDSI). Source: Woods Hole Research Center; McKinsey Global Institute analysis Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 7 Dark, stormy skies, ships and the port of Colon, Panama. © Jonathan Kingston/National Geographic Supply chains Could climate become the weak link in your supply chain? Much of global economic production is organized around a complex system of interdependent supply chains.

Supply chains facilitate the production of everything from computers and cars to lifesaving medicines and food, and support world trade in goods that is worth almost $20 trillion annually.1 End products may have up to many thousands of parts, sourced from diverse geographies around the world. Over time, these supply chains have been honed to deliver maximum efficiency and speed.

But questions about supply chain risks and resilience are now being raised in the context of the global Covid-19 pandemic as well as acute weather events.2 A changing climate and the greater frequency and/or severity of hazards may increase disruptions in supply chains that interrupt production, raise costs, hurt corporate revenues, and lead to higher prices or shortages for consumers.

According to a recent Allianz survey of companies, business interruptions are the number-one risk facing the corporate sector today. 3 A similar poll by the World Economic Forum found natural catastrophes as the greatest concern for businesses in East Asia and the Pacific. 4 Hurricanes and floods contribute to the majority of economic losses in natural disasters, accounting for 50 percent and 20 percent of total losses since 2000, respectively.

5 In this case study, we examine how risks from climate hazards, already present in global supply chains, are likely to evolve over the next few decades. We focus specifically on the risk from hurricanes and extreme precipitation and find that supply chains can be disrupted in different ways.

For example, access to plants or production at plants can be shut down or production of critical inputs or access to them can be disrupted, impacting production downstream and potentially increasing prices to manufacturers and consumers. We identify three broad types of supply chains that illustrate how climate risks vary across a spectrum: specialty, intermediate, and commodity.

Typically, the more specialized the supply chain, the more severe the impact for a downstream player could be as supply of a critical input may only be available from the source that has been disrupted. However, the more commoditized the supply chain is, the larger the number of downstream players that may be affected by spiking prices from a sudden reduction in supply. For a deeper appreciation of the extent of risks, we focus on two supply chains that illustrate how disruption may play out.

As an example of specialty supply chains, we examine the semiconductor industry; for commodity supply chains, heavy rare earth metals. Both create critical inputs for advanced industries. Semiconductor chips are ubiquitous in electronics from computers to smartphones to electronic watches. Rare earths are critical in aerospace and defense, electric vehicles, wind turbines, drones, medical appliances, and other electronics.

Both supply chains are highly geographically concentrated in regions with an increasing probability of relevant climate hazards. However, these are only examples illustrating broader trends. 1 2 3 4 5 World Trade Statistical Review, 2018. See also Globalization in transition: The future of trade and global value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2019. Recent MGI research examines how industry value chains are exposed to a broader set of risks, including climate events.

This work also examines vulnerabilities within specific companies and broader value chains, financial losses, and ways to bolster resilience. See Risk, resilience, and rebalancing in global value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, August 2020. Allianz Risk Barometer 2019, Allianz, January 2019. World Economic Forum, Regional risks for doing business 2019, World Trade Organization, 2019. NatCatSERVICE, Munich Re, 2019.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 9 Assessing the inherent risk to supply chains without any adaptation action and based on an RCP 8.5 scenario, the probability of a hurricane occurring that is severe enough to disrupt semiconductor manufacturing (defined as a hurricane with more rainfall than manufacturing assets typically are designed to withstand) could increase from 1 percent per annum currently to 2 to 4 percent by 2040 across much of the western Pacific.6 Increase in hurricane wind hazard is less homogenous but is projected to increase from 1 percent per annum currently up to 2 percent by 2040 in some parts of Taiwan and Japan.

In other words, risk of a disruptive hurricane could be expected to approximately double.7 We estimate that in this scenario, such hurricanes could lead to months of lost production for the directly affected player and could cause up to 35 percent revenue loss for unprepared downstream players in a disaster year.

In the case of rare earths, we find that the likelihood of extreme rainfall in any given year which is sufficient to trigger mine and road closures could roughly double by 2030 in southeastern China. This could reduce global production by 20 percent in a disaster year. 8 Global supply chains could adapt to manage these risks.

For semiconductor supply chains, two key areas of adaptation include building disaster-proof plants (for producers) and raising inventory levels in order to continue production even if a supply chain is interrupted (for downstream players). We find that building disaster-proof plants means additional costs of roughly 2 percent of the building costs, which equals an additional $20 million for an average plant.

Raising the inventory to provide a meaningful buffer in case of supply disruption, with estimated costs for warehousing and working capital, may increase input costs by less than a percent. Companies using rare earths could protect themselves from climate-change-induced physical risk by raising inventory levels at the costs of additional working capital and storage space needed.

Rare earth miners could, for example, by using leaches that decrease the risk of landslides or moving leach holes away from the steepest slopes.9 We estimate these measures could lead to a cost of goods sold (COGS) increase of less than 5 percent.

Supply chains are already being disrupted by extreme weather, and this risk will increase with climate change Floods, storms, drought, and fires are all climate hazards that have already disrupted supply chains in recent years, halting production and resulting in lost revenues and profits. While this case study focuses on the impact of storms and floods, drought can also impact supply chains (See Box 1, “How drought can affect supply chains”).

As climate change makes extreme weather more frequent and/or severe, it increases the annual probability of events that are more intense than manufacturing assets are constructed to withstand, and supply chain disruptions become more common. 6 7 8 9 10 If not indicated differently, we follow standard practice and define current and future (2030, 2050) states as average climatic behavior over multidecade periods.

Climate state today is defined as average conditions between 1998 and 2017, in 2030 as average between 2021 and 2040, and in 2050 as average between 2041 and 2060. For the analysis of 2040, the average of 2031 and 2050 was used. Also, if not indicated differently, the climatological analyses in this case use RCP 8.5 to represent the changes in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations that could occur absent a mitigation response. Please see technical appendix of the full report for details.

Woods Hole Research Center analysis drawing on: Kerry Emanuel, The Coupled Hurricane Intensity Prediction System (CHIPS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019; Water and Climate Resilience Center, RAND Corporation.

While total hurricane frequency is expected to remain unchanged or to decrease slightly under increased global warming, cumulative hurricane rainfall rates, average intensity, and proportion of storms that reach Category 4 or 5 intensity are projected to rise, even for an increase of two degrees Celsius or less in global average temperatures. Thomas Knutson et al., “Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II.

Projected response to anthropogenic warming,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 2019. Probability increases from approximately 2 percent per year in 1965 to approximately 2.5 percent currently, approximately 4 percent in 2030, and approximately 6 percent in 2050. Heavy rare earths are mined in open-pit clay mines using an in situ leaching technique, making them sensitive to extreme rainfall. Shallow holes of a few meters are dug, and hydrochloric acid leach is sprayed over the clay.

The acid acts as an extraction agent; after 150 to 400 days, leach containing heavy rare earths has concentrated in the leach holes. This leach is then brought to a treatment pond, where a precipitation agent (such as ammonium bicarbonate) is applied, causing the heavy rare earth to form roughly 92 percent grade rare earth oxides that accumulate at the bottom of the solution. McKinsey Global Institute Box 1.

How drought can affect supply chains Drought has already impacted supply chains across the world. In Europe, for example, drought has had a significant impact on the flow of goods through waterways. In the third quarter of 2018, transport on the Rhine was down 27 percent year on year due to low water levels.

Transport performance was also 10 percent lower on the Danube.1 This resulted in a 10 percent drop in Germany’s production of chemicals and pharmaceuticals from September to November, as major industrial players shut down plants that were unable to secure raw material, reporting in some instances over $220 million in additional logistics costs.

The Panama Canal, which shortens the 8,000-mile journey around Cape Horn to just 48 miles, is already having to reduce weight on ships due to reduced water levels in drought conditions.2 Similarly, along the Mississippi River in the United States, both floods and droughts have disrupted logistics and agricultural production over the past decade. 3 A tow on the upper Mississippi River typically has 15 barges, each capable of carrying more than 1,000 tons.

A one-inch drop in river level can reduce tow capacity by 255 tons. 4 1 2 3 4 Holly Ellyatt, “A major river in Europe hit by drought could create economic havoc,” CNBC, July 31, 2019. “Climate change threatens the Panama Canal,” Economist, September 21, 2019. Henry Fountain, “What Panama’s Worst Drought Means for Its Canal’s Future”, New York Times, May 17, 2019.

Karl Plume, “Floods stall fertilizer shipments in latest blow to U.S. farmers,” Reuters, April 25, 2019; Debbie Elliott, “Drought causes ripple effect along mighty Mississippi River,” NPR, January 23, 2013. “U.S. Energy Sector Vulnerabilities to Climate Change and Extreme Weather,” US Department of Energy, 2013. Extreme events that exceed the design threshold of physical assets can cause major supply chain disruptions. One of the costliest floods in the past decade occurred in Thailand in 2011.

Flood defenses that were supposed to keep industrial facilities dry broke and became overwhelmed by extreme rain, disrupting production of food, automobiles, and consumer electronics and raising prices for consumers (See Box 2, “What happened in Thailand in 2011 when the floods hit?”).

Design thresholds vary but are typically defined to be tolerant up to a specific magnitude of event, which in turn has a specific frequency or likelihood associated with it (often referred to as the historical return period of the event).

Common design thresholds for manufacturing assets are typically in the range of 1 to 2 percent probability events (also known as “100-year” and “50-year” events, respectively), depending on what is required either by local regulations or by reinsurers.10 As climate change makes extreme weather more frequent and/or severe, it increases the annual probability of events that are more intense than manufacturing assets are constructed to withstand and supply chain disruptions become more common.

Research suggests that thunderstorm conditions will become more frequent due to climate change, and furthermore that hurricane rainfall, average intensity, and proportion of storms that reach Category 4 or 5 will increase, magnifying disruption risk for manufacturing in Asia and along the US Gulf Coast.11 10 11 Based on expert interviews.

Noah S. Diffenbaugh, Martin Scherer, and Robert J. Trapp, “Robust increases in severe thunderstorm environments in response to greenhouse forcing,” PNAS, Volume 10, October 8, 2013; Resilinc, EventWatch annual reports, 2014–18; Thomas Knutson et al., Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II. Projected response to anthropogenic warming, American Meteorological Society, 2019. Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 11 Box 2.

What happened in Thailand in 2011 when the floods hit?

In 2011, Thailand suffered the worst flooding in 50 years with many regions under 3 meters of water at peak severity, inundating entire provinces in the industrial areas near Bangkok.1 Flooding lasted 30 to 60 days, disrupted global electronics, automotive and food supply chains, and resulted in losses totaling $40 billion to $50 billion.2 The impact on local industry was severe; industrial output in Thailand dropped almost 50 percent in November 2011 compared with the previous year.

Manufacturing accounted for 70 percent of damages and losses, representing about onethird of manufacturing value added in Thailand at the time. 3 While climate attribution studies broadly suggest no link of the Thai floods to climate change, they are a good illustrative example of how increasing frequency of extreme events can threaten specific supply chains.

4 There were several factors that made the impact from these floods so severe: — Production was concentrated in a high-hazard region: Thailand has a “supercluster strategy,” where incentives such as tax breaks, grants, infrastructure upgrades, workforce support, etc. encourage the colocation of academia, research, and multiple industries. As a result, manufacturing is concentrated in a few estates in the Chao Praya river basin (which has extreme precipitation in the monsoon season) near Bangkok.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 12 — Resilience was insufficient: Flood defenses in industrial estates could not withstand the flood, and either broke or were overrun. — Reconstruction took time: The most resilient small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) in manufacturing returned to business after only one to three months, almost as soon as the floodwaters receded.

Larger firms, took three to five months to restart production as they were using more advanced equipment with longer replacement times, which delayed recovery. The least resilient SMEs had even longer delays and higher levels of bankruptcy, reflecting a lower financial capacity to tolerate outages.

By June 1, 2012, seven to eight months after the onset of the floods, 70 percent of Thai factories were restored or partly restored, 20 percent were not yet restored, and 5 to 10 percent of factories had shut down permanently as a result of the floods. 5 Even a year after the floods, utilization of Thai electronics SME facilities was still only at 40 percent. There were significant knock-on effects globally in key supply chains.

The electronics and automotive industries were hardest hit and experienced an 80 percent year-on-year decline in production in November.6 While the automotive sector returned to positive growth after four months, recovery for the electronics industry took longer and year-on-year growth was still negative seven months after the onset of the floods.

Japanese manufacturers in the electronics and automotive industries were particularly affected as they were sourcing large parts of their inputs from Thailand. Most of the manufacturing facilities of the suppliers to Japanese automotive companies were disrupted for only one to three months; however, some factories were closed for up to six months, as plants were critically damaged and needed significant repairs. In total, car manufacturers produced at least 750,000 fewer cars because of the flood.

Car manufacturers with smaller inventories, concentrated supply, and a long recovery time were more affected than others.7 Prices of hard disk drives (HDD), the key product segment in the Thai electronics industry, spiked 80 to 190 percent (reflecting different products) as up to 40 percent of global HDD production capacity was flooded, with prices remaining elevated for more than a year.

8 Industries downstream of and adjacent to HDD manufacturing were affected unevenly; the share prices of a major computer manufacturer fell 5 percent, while share prices for a manufacturer of solid state disks (SSDs), a substitute product, rose 5 percent.9 This illustrates that while downstream players suffer when suppliers are disrupted, producers of substitute products may actually gain a temporary competitive advantage.

Royal Thai Government and World Bank, Thai flood 2011: Rapid assessment for resilient recovery and reconstruction planning, 2012; Surapong Sarapa, The status of current meteorological alert of Thailand, Regional Workshop on Impact-Based Forecasts in RA II (Asia), Seoul, Korea, November 7–9, 2017, wmo.int/pages/ prog/amp/pwsp/documents/2-2-1_SurapongSARAPA_Thailand.pdf. Christophe Courbage, Meghan Orie, and Walter R. Stahel. “Thai floods and insurance.” The Geneva Reports, 2012.

T. W. Bank, “Thai Flood 2011: Rapid assessment for resilient recovery and reconstruction planning.” Bangkok: The World Bank, 2012. See for example, Thomas C. Peterson, Peter A. Stott, and Stephanie Herring, “Explaining extreme events of 2011 from a climate perspective,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, July 2012, Volume 93, Number 7.

Masahiko Haraguchi and Upmanu Lall, “Flood risks and impacts: A case study of Thailand’s floods in 2011 and research questions for supply chain decision making,” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, December 2015, Volume 14, Part 3. David S. H. Rosenthal et al., The economics of long-term digital storage, Stanford University, September 2012.

Bank of Thailand; Masahiko Haraguchi and Upmanu Lall, “Flood risks and impacts: A case study of Thailand’s floods in 2011 and research questions for supply chain decision making,” International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, December 2015, Volume 14, Part 3. Ibid. “Thai floods hit global hard drive production,” Financial Times, October 20, 2011.

McKinsey Global Institute The risk of disruption has increased as supply chains have become optimized for efficiency rather than resiliency Increasingly global and efficient supply chains have underpinned economic growth and productivity improvements over the past few decades. However, the drive for efficiency and the resulting greater complexity and intricacy have increased the vulnerability of supply chains to disruption. Changes in inventory levels contribute to increased vulnerability.

Since lean manufacturing gained popularity in the 1970s, with Just-in-Time and Just-in-Sequence production, companies have been striving to reduce metrics like inventory levels. Lower inventories reduce working capital, but also reduce supply chain resilience as the leanest companies are most reliant on receiving inputs from their suppliers on time. One industry where it is very costly to hold large inventories is aerospace, because parts like an airplane fuselage are so big.

This also applies to some commodities, like the petrochemical gas ethylene, which either takes up a large amount of space or needs expensive pressurized containers; only a few days of ethylene inventory exists, and much of it is in transit in tankers or pipelines. Large inventories are also expensive in the semiconductor industry, because rapid innovation cycles cause inventory to depreciate fast. Vulnerability is also exacerbated by changes in production strategy.

To achieve economies of scale, suppliers often only have one production site with the necessary technology to produce the goods they are making. For example, in a 2018 survey, 88 percent of suppliers across industries responded that they have only one production site available for each of their products.

This was especially true in aerospace and defense and pharmaceuticals, where high safety requirements and long lead times to acquire regulatory approval increase the cost of new manufacturing facilities.12 Very specific requirements for production conditions (for example, in pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, or automotive) also mean that even small changes in the manufacturing environment can create production disruptions.

Furthermore, these specific requirements make it harder to quickly get new sources of input during a disaster. For example, Hurricane Maria in 2017 created a shortage of saline bags in the United States as 40 percent of saline bags are produced in Puerto Rico, which suffered a power outage for 90 days following the hurricane.

Strict requirements for the sterility of the manufacturing environment prevented other manufacturers from rapidly stepping in to compensate for lost capacity.13 There are also examples of raw materials that require specific natural conditions, like lithium. Lithium is extracted by drying lithium brine in an evaporation pond for two years in areas with very low precipitation.

However, shifting weather patterns are already interfering with this process as historically dry regions in Chile have experienced torrential rainfalls over the past few years, reducing lithium output.14 In some instances, production has also become more concentrated in regions with high climate hazards. With the goal of maximizing returns, companies have shifted manufacturing production centers to areas with preferable operating characteristics.

Historically, this was in part due to labor arbitrage, but more recently, another driver has been to co-locate in specialized clusters.15 However, many of these areas are more susceptible to climate hazards. We identify two aspects of increased globalization that may be increasing climate risk in supply chains. 12 13 14 15 EventWatch 2018 annual report, Resilinc, 2019. Philip J. Palin et al., Supply chain resilience and the 2017 hurricane season, CNA Corporation, 2018.

Ernest Scheyder, “Albemarle’s lithium sales drop after Chilean rains,” Reuters, May 8, 2019. Globalization in transition: The future of trade and value chains, McKinsey Global Institute, January 2019.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 13 Firstly, the value of trade in goods as a proportion of all economic activity has increased from 10 percent in 1960, peaking at 25 percent in 2008 and then retreating to 23 percent in 2018.16 This means that supply chains are more exposed to climate hazards from all over the world.

This particularly applies to companies that assemble specialized manufactured goods containing many thousands of parts, like consumer electronics companies or automotive and airplane OEMs, as they require reliable inputs of a broad range of specialized parts that often are sourced from many different locations. The increased trade intensity also increases reliance on functional infrastructure services (for example, ports, rails, roads, and airports).

Logistical infrastructure is often less well defended than manufacturing assets. Chronic flooding can cause regular short infrastructure interruptions of days or weeks. Even if businesses can absorb these interruptions, they can still add costs to production (for example, cost of relying on a private power generator), disproportionately affect small businesses (who typically lack the ability to run to private infrastructure services).

The cost of self-generation is typically three times larger than that supplied from the grid.17 Acute tail events can cause significant damage to infrastructure systems, resulting in longer service outages that may cause bankruptcy to even larger and more prepared businesses. Secondly, economic activity has moved to higher-hazard countries, on average.

For example, in 2018, countries with high hurricane hazard contributed 45 percent of global value of traded goods compared with 40 percent in 1991.18 Some industries are particularly concentrated in one region, driven by a focus on regional competitive advantage and the self-reinforcing effects of regional ecosystems. These industries have higher volume of output at risk, as a significant share of the global supply capacity can be disrupted simultaneously.

For instance, 40 percent or more of global refinery capacity of metals like copper, cobalt, and aluminum is in China. Production asset resilience has generally increased with improved technology, increased regulatory pressure for safety, and higher capital expenditures increasing value at risk and so incentivizing increased investments.

However, this is partly offset by an increase in the requirements of the manufacturing environment—for example, moisture, temperature, or dust levels in manufacturing areas due to requirements from regulations or advanced automated technology. Automation in industries like automotive and semiconductors has grown rapidly.

Automated manufacturing robots often are less resilient than laborers in several ways: some robots may be damaged by dust and moisture levels that workers can tolerate; repairs of specialized machines may take several months; and power consumed by the robots makes it necessary to install more emergency power to continue operations.

Industries in rapid growth (like cobalt, lithium, medical appliances, or industrial robotics) may also experience “growth pains” like tight inventories and high utilization rates, further increasing climate risk. If the growth is fueled by high innovation rates, then leading-edge technology will be less commoditized, and fewer suppliers will be available to ramp up if one is disrupted.

Therefore, some of the fastest growing and most technically advanced and innovative industries may be the most at risk and so the most in need of adaptation. 16 17 18 14 Ibid. Stephane Hallegatte, Jun Rentschler, and Julie Rozenberg, Lifelines: The Resilient Infrastructure Opportunity, World Bank, July 2019. World Bank; Woods Hole Research Center.

McKinsey Global Institute We identify three broad types of supply chains based on varying risk characteristics of downstream disruption from climate change We identify a spectrum of supply chains to help assess the nature of climate risk that companies may face. These include specialty and commodity at either end and intermediate in the middle (Supply chain‑1).

Specialty In specialty supply chains, OEMs typically secure their inputs through long-term contracts or strategic collaborations with suppliers. Critical supplies may even be secured internally if players are vertically integrated. Suppliers may have unique manufacturing equipment that is designed specifically to produce the components of their customers. The necessary technology may exist in only one or a handful of manufacturing plants in the world.

A good example is leading-edge semiconductors (see below for more details on semiconductor supply chains). In the supply chain of semiconductors, a supply disruption could lead to long production disruptions for downstream players, up to a year in extreme cases. The end products are designed for specific inputs, which means that inputs with different designs—for example, a microcontroller from another supplier—may change the functionality of the end product.

If a supplier is disrupted, a downstream player without access to the usual inputs would have to requalify their product with their customers, using different inputs. As the alternative input would have somewhat different properties, this could require a full redesign of the product, which is typically not a viable strategy. Therefore, downstream players are reliant on getting the specific inputs they have planned for. Manufacturing of these inputs requires specific, advanced, and costly equipment.

This machinery typically exists in only one to five locations around the world, due to economies of scale.19 Even if several machines exist, utilization may already be near 100 percent, preventing unaffected suppliers from scaling up if one of the machines breaks.20 Therefore, the machines must be replaced before production can resume. As this equipment is costly and specialized, it is manufactured on-demand, which typically takes several months.

Specialized industries are thus often in turn reliant on another specialized supply chain, compounding downtimes.

Additionally, industries like semiconductor equipment already have a production backlog of several months, driving the equipment replacement time up to a total of 6 to 12 months for some manufacturing devices.21 During the production disruption, the players downstream of the disrupted supplier are likely unable to maintain production unless they have access to alternative sources of inputs. Intermediate Intermediate supply chains are between specialty and commodity in their characteristics.

Bilateral supply relationships are common but are shorter-term and of a less strategic nature than for the specialty supply chains. It is typically cheap for customers to switch suppliers, and several suppliers offer goods of comparable quality. Examples include standardized or lower quality chips; airplane interiors (for example, seats); and niche commodity chemicals.

The less specialized the supply chain is, the easier it will be for unaffected suppliers to take over for a supplier that is disrupted. Therefore, downstream players will have to compete for the remaining supply capacity. 19 20 21 World fab forecast, SEMI, September 2019. McKinsey Semiconductor Practice expert interviews. Ibid.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 15 Case study Supply chain-1 Supply chains face different knock-on effects from production disruption depending on the degree of commoditization.

Strength of impact Illustrative Player directly affected by the disaster Low High Player experiencing negative knock-on effects Player experiencing competitive advantage Specialty Examples Suppliers Airplane fuselages, specialty drugs, high-end CPU chips, leading-edge optoelectronics S1 C1 S2 C2 S3 C3 S1 C1 S2 C2 S3 C3 S1 C1 S2 C2 RAM chips, generic automotive parts (e.g., car tires), hard disk drives, airplane interiors (e.g., seats) Metals (e.g., rare earths), oil and gas, petrochemicals (e.g., ethylene) Customers Market S3 Commodity Source: McKinsey Global Institute analysis 16 McKinsey Global Institute C3 Commodity In commoditized supply chains, downstream players acquire their inputs on a commodity trading exchange or via commodity brokers, and there is typically no direct bilateral relationship between the supplier and the customer.

Products are standardized, and several suppliers are selling goods of comparable quality. Heavy rare earths are an example of a commoditized supply chain (see below for more details on heavy rare earth supply chains). Rare earth producers sell their product to brokers who resell it to industries that use rare earths in the production of EV batteries or specialized electronics.22 Therefore, all downstream players would be affected by the supply disruption as prices would rise.

The effects of Hurricane Harvey caused US steam cracker utilization rates to drop by more than 20 percent between August and September 2017. Ethylene prices increased over 25 percent during this period.23 To better illustrate what happens due to disruptions in supply chains, we consider two examples of supply chains at the bookends of this distribution.

The probability of a hurricane of sufficient intensity to disrupt semiconductor supply chains may grow two to four times by 2040 As an example of a specialty supply chain, we analyze supply chains for semiconductor manufacturing, more than a $400 billion industry.24 By 2040, a company using leading-edge chips (for example, with applications in memory, logic, communication, or optoelectronics) such as an automotive OEM, sourcing from geographies in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, or other hubs in the western Pacific, can expect that hurricanes sufficient to disrupt their suppliers will become two to four times more likely.25 Some of these disruptions may last for several months.

This has implications for many industries as chips are increasingly critical to the modern economy.

For example, electrical content in cars increased from 2 percent in 1960 to 35 percent in 2010.26 Several stages of the supply chain are highly concentrated in Asia–Pacific, including: — Raw material, for example, wafer and chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) slurry — Chip manufacturing in segments within different application areas, for example, logical components like CPUs, communication technologies like 5G, memory technologies like RAM — Chip packaging — Chip assembly, creating specialized electronic circuitry for automotive, consumer tech, and industrial electronics, for example More than 50 percent of chip foundry production capacity of about 45 nanometer or smaller chips (typically focused on logic chips) is concentrated in ~15 facilities (factory modules) in Taiwan.

About 98 percent of manufacturing capacity of 350 nanometer and smaller optoelectronic chips (for example, used in image sensors, lasers, LEDs) is in nine facilities in southern Japan, and about 40 percent of memory chip capacity is in ten facilities in Seoul and surrounding cities.27 A product using such chips will typically be reliant on many parts working at the same time.

Therefore, a supply disruption in any one component category (for example, memory) may lead to many downstream production disruptions. The downstream assembled product will sell at a price higher than the sum of its components, and may be 100 times or 22 23 24 25 26 27 Nawshad Haque et al., “Rare earth elements: Overview of mining, mineralogy, uses, sustainability and environmental impact,” Resources, October 2014, Volume 3, Number 4, mdpi.com/2079-9276/3/4/614/htm.

IHS Markit Economics and Country Risk. Arne Holst, Semiconductor industry sales worldwide 1987-2020, Statista, Jan 7, 2020. McKinsey Global Institute analysis; Woods Hole Research Center. McKinsey Automotive Practice expert interviews. World fab forecast, SEMI, September 2019. Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 17 even several thousand times the price of any individual part.

For this reason, the disrupted gross output from an extreme weather event may become much larger if disruptions cascade through supply chains. Hurricane intensity can be measured in wind speeds, using the Saffir-Simpson scale, or in precipitation, measured in millimeters of precipitation per event, or precipitation over a time period.

High wind speeds can be a hazard directly to vulnerable structures (for example, distribution power cables) or by causing storm surge that inundates coastal infrastructure and properties. Precipitation can directly harm sensitive manufacturing assets, particularly if the building exterior is already damaged by high wind speed, and cause flooding or landslides. This analysis keeps exposure constant to highlight how much climatic factors are driving risk.

In other words, it assumes the distribution of facilities in 2040 is largely similar to today, which can be considered a “business as usual” scenario on the basis of clustering effects discussed in the introduction. Facility owners may decide to take action and relocate future or indeed current facilities. This analysis shows what the inherent risk is and how to best manage it.

The increase in annual probability of hurricanes with extreme precipitation is driven primarily by an increase in temperature driving increased water-carrying capacity of hurricanes.28 This increased water-carrying capacity leads both to more intense rainfall (measured in millimeters per day), and longer-lasting rainfalls. Moreover, hurricanes could move slower, making rainfall last even longer in each location.

Both the increase in intensity and duration of rainfall increase the risk of landslides and risk of rainwater directly contaminating the manufacturing assets. Increased rainfall intensity contributes more to increased flooding hazard than longer duration does. The reason is that the longer duration increases the opportunity for runoff, softening the severity of floods, compared with storms with similar total rainfall levels but over shorter durations.

We analyzed hurricanes with a 1 percent annual probability of occurring in each location, based on cumulative event rainfall. With increasingly severe storms, events that currently have a 1 percent probability of occurring could become two to three times as common by 2040 across ten major semiconductor hubs, under an RCP 8.5 scenario (Supply chain‑2).

In Taiwan, this means that cities like Hsinchu, Taichung, and Tainan could see hurricanes with 1,500- to 2,500-millimeter precipitation or more approximately twice to three times as often, depending on the specific location.29 In Japan, precipitation levels for these events range from 500 millimeters in Tokyo to 950 millimeters in Kirishima, on the southern tip of the main islands.

This is more than the recent Typhoon Jebi, which MunichRE’s NatCat database estimates is the costliest hurricane to date in the western Pacific. 30 The precipitation from a 1 percent hurricane precipitation hazard in Korea is much lower, only 100 to 150 millimeters of rainfall near Seoul, but this is where the increase in annual probability is highest—up to four times. 31 28 29 30 31 18 Thomas Knutson et al., “Tropical cyclones and climate change assessment: Part II.

Projected response to anthropogenic warming,” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 2019; Geert Jan van Oldenborgh et al., “Attribution of extreme rainfall from Hurricane Harvey, August 2017,” Environmental Research Letters, December 2017, Volume 12, Number 12.

This is higher than the 1,539 millimeters of rainfall observed in the US during Hurricane Harvey; Harvey was the wettest tropical cyclone on record in the United States and resulting flood waters, combined with wind speeds, caused damages of $100 billion. Munich Re, NatCatSERVICE, 2019. Jack F. Williams and Ch’ang-yi David Chang, Taiwan’s Environmental Struggle Toward a green silicon island, Routledge 2008. Munich Re, NatCatSERVICE, 2019.

Kerry Emanuel, The Coupled Hurricane Intensity Prediction System (CHIPS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019; Water and Climate Resilience Center, RAND Corporation. Woods Hole Research Center. McKinsey Global Institute Case study Supply chain-2 Semiconductor manufacturing hubs in the Western Pacific are expected to experience disruptive extreme hurricanes two to three times as often by 2040 compared to today.

Rainfall during historical 1-in-100 year hurricanes (with potential to disrupt production, as assets are typically engineered to withstand up to 1-in-100 year events)1 Millimeters per hurricane Based on RCP 8.5 Semiconductor market segment Opto- Foundry Memory electronic >25 Global market 16–25 share2 11–15 % ≤10 ≤20 ≤50 ≤100 ≤250 ≤500 ≤1,000 ≤1,500 ≤2,000 >2,000 Change in frequency of hurricanes of this intensity by 2040 Historical = 1 ≤1.00 1.01–1.25 1.26–1.75 1.76–2.25 2.26–3.00 >3.00 1.

Hurricanes with 100-year historical return period, using 1980–2000 as reference period. 2. Global market share of each hub in given product segment (e.g., foundry for 26% of chips of <47mm size globally concentrated in Tainan). Note: See the Technical Appendix for why we chose RCP 8.5. All projections based on RCP 8.5, CMIP 5 multimodel ensemble.

Source: Woods Hole Research Center; McKinsey Global Institute analysis Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 19 Change in wind speed evolution is also expected to be uneven across geographies. Hurricanes with annual probability of 1 percent today, based on maximum wind speed, will reach 1.25 to 2 percent annual probability in some locations by 2040, like western Taiwan and southwestern Japan.

But there are winners as well as losers—such hurricanes are also set to decrease to 0.7 percent in parts of Korea and the Philippines. For exposed locations in Taiwan or Japan that see an increase, the historical 1 percent probability storm is either a category 4 or 5, with wind speeds above about 200 kilometers per hour.

32 There are three drivers of near-term losses for suppliers that are hit by such events, potentially leading to losses of up to 200 percent of annual profit and 35 percent of revenues: physical damages to assets, including facilities, production equipment, and inventories; reduced sales, either because production is disrupted or because goods cannot be shipped to the market; and higher costs in the reconstruction phase and after the plant is back in production, as market prices of labor, energy, and logistics may spike following a disaster (as seen in the 2011 Thai floods).

The combination of these impacts may also limit suppliers’ ability to quickly and efficiently restore production, by reducing their ability to raise capital for repairs or by choking short-term cash flow and presenting unusual operational obstacles. However, these effects can be partly mitigated if manufacturers hold disaster insurance, have asset hardening or tighter design standards, or if the government offers disaster support.

Semiconductor supply could be reduced by an extreme hurricane in several ways. First, common losses during extreme events include loss of infrastructure services, for example due to flooding of roads near the facilities preventing workers from accessing the facility, power grid outages, or closures of ports and airports. Second, direct damages to manufacturing assets are rarer, and historically direct damages have been minor.

For instance, building exteriors may experience minor damages from wind pressure, water, or physical objects, but in itself, this is unlikely to lead to a production disruption.

Other damages that have been observed in the past include damages to raw materials, work in progress inventory and finished chips, as well as unplanned shutdowns that may require rebooting the production robotics and requalifying that conditions in the manufacturing environment (for example, dust levels, humidity, temperature) are within required limits.

This could disrupt several weeks and potentially months of production, particularly if the manufacturing area is contaminated by water, dust, or moisture that damages large amounts of inventory. These damages contributed to the slow recoveries following the 2011 Thai floods. Third, damages to the internal power system, building main structure, or specialized manufacturing equipment could be particularly costly as it could cause up to or beyond a full year of supply disruptions.

For this reason, suppliers invest in making these parts of the factory particularly resilient. For instance, suppliers may have two connections to the central power grid, each sufficient to supply the plant with enough power on its own if the other should break. The manufacturing area clean rooms containing the manufacturing devices are typically placed on the upper floors to prevent any flooding. The clean rooms are often protected by an additional inner shell.

If factories are flooded during the extreme weather, the manufacturing devices may be moved to particularly robust safe rooms to ensure that they are unharmed. 32 20 Woods Hole Research Center Analysis, drawing from: Kerry Emanuel, The Coupled Hurricane Intensity Prediction System (CHIPS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2019. National Hurricane Center and Central Pacific Hurricane Center, Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale.

McKinsey Global Institute We find that a severe supply disruption can cause cascading production disruptions downstream, particularly for unprepared players (Supply chain‑3). Using a hypothetical example, we estimate that downstream players could lose up to a third of annual revenue if supply is disrupted for an illustrative period of five months, a duration seen in some of the more severely disrupted players in the 2011 Thai floods.

This could be the case if no alternative source or substitute was able to keep supply going (beyond a minimal inventory of finished goods) and if no measures had been taken to limit losses from disrupted downstream production (for example, insurance or negotiations with customers to delay supply). A well-prepared player, on the other hand, may only lose about 5 percent of revenue in a similar event.

Preparations may include dual sourcing (so only 50 percent of supply is lost), increasing supplier resiliency through due diligence and collaboration with suppliers on asset hardening; this can limit the recovery time to less than one month.

Several other actions can help further reduce the losses, including insurance, even faster recovery through best practice emergency procedures, and discounted cross-selling of substitute products (for example, premium models or older product versions) to end consumers. These adaptations come with a cost that needs to be considered, but many of these investments may be smaller than the loss avoided.

Adaptation areas for semiconductor supply chains include two key areas: building disasterproof plants (for producers) and raising inventory levels in order to continue production even if a supply chain is interrupted (for downstream players). We find that building disaster-proof plants means additional costs of roughly 2 percent of the building costs which equals an additional $20 million for an average plant.

Raising the inventory to provide a meaningful buffer in case of supply disruption, with estimated costs for warehousing and working capital, could increase input costs by less than a percent. The value of preparedness can be even higher if the supply disruption happens before a new product launch. In consumer electronics, product global change: life cycles are short, with new smartphone models being launched every year, and product lifetimes rarely exceeding five years.

If product launch is delayed by five months, the technology may be outdated shortly thereafter, and competitors may gain a significant advantage. Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 21 Case study Supply chain-3 Being prepared for extreme weather impacts can minimize supply chain disruptions. In the case of disruption to the semiconductor supply chain, an unprepared downstream company could lose about 35% of annual revenue while preparation limits the loss to about 5%.

Effect of disruption from 100-year hurricane on upstream semiconductor manufacturer Impact on earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT), % of normal year revenues Illustrative Normal year Normal year revenues 100 Disaster year— low-impact scenario Disaster year— high-impact scenario -70 Normal year costs Normal year EBIT 30 Damaged assets write-down: plant, equipment, inventory1 EBIT impact from lost sales2 Disefficiencies in logistics, labor, basic supplies3 EBIT in disaster year -45 -30 -10 -55 Effect of disruption from 100-year hurricane on downstream electronics player4 % of normal year revenues Normal year Hypothetical disaster year An unprepared player could lose ~35% of revenues in a disaster year Normal year revenues 100 Lost sales from disrupted supply Sales based on safety stock Disaster year revenues A well-prepared player would lose much less, even in a disaster year 40 5 100 15 10 65 95 -35% 5-month disruption of 100% of single-sourced supply With 2 weeks of safety stock, resulting production disruption of 4.5 months -5% Dual sources and stronger asset resilience: only 3 months of 50% of supply disrupted 2x safety stock, spending at half pace due to dual sourcing, lasting for 2 months Only 1 month disruption of 50% supply 1.

Includes structural plant failure, replacement, repairs, and/or requalification of equipment, as well as raw material, work-in-progress inventory, and finished goods. 2. Lost revenues from disrupted sales, partly mitigated by reduced cost of goods sold proportional to reduction in sales volumes. 3. Includes costly additional labor, expensive backup power during grid failure, makeshift logistics solutions during rail or road disruptions, etc. 4.

Excludes impact of insurance; exact outcomes vary considerably with local conditions and other factors. Source: CP Analytics; Thailand government reports on 2011 floods; McKinsey Global Institute analysis 22 McKinsey Global Institute The probability heavy rare earths production is severely disrupted from extreme rainfall may increase two to three times by 2030 Heavy rare earths production is concentrated in southeastern China, which is increasingly exposed to extreme rainfall.

About 80 to 90 percent of global production is concentrated in only 60 mines in a 150-kilometer-radius circle around Anyuan, in the province of Jiangxi. Heavy rare earths are vital in permanent magnets and electronics used in the defense sector, electric vehicles, wind turbines, consumer electronics, and medical appliances and typically cannot be substituted with light rare earths or other materials without a significant drop in quality.

We examine this as an example of a commodity supply chain facing potential disruption. Scientists are confident that continued increasing global temperatures will drive an increase in intensity and frequency of heavy precipitation events in many regions.

33 We find that heavy rare earth production in southeastern China will experience extreme precipitation events (defined as events that occurred historically with an annual probability of about 2 percent, corresponding to precipitation of about 170 millimeters per day in the relevant region) twice as often by 2030. Expert estimates and historical events indicate that such rainfall events significantly increase the risk of landslides in the region.

This region already has some of the strongest rainfalls in the world, with pluvial flooding nearly every year, and some mines already close for a couple of months during the wet season in mid-June to mid-September. Moreover, annual probability of extreme precipitation events has already increased to 2.5 percent compared with the historical baseline of 1951-80, and will continue evolving past 2030, reaching 6 percent annual probability by 2050.

34 While China has invested significantly in flood defenses in the past 20 years this has primarily focused on urban areas, and has done little to reduce risk to rare earth mines. We estimate that the manifestation of an extreme precipitation event, or series of events, could cause at least a 20 percent drop in heavy rare earth output, and potentially much more in a worst case scenario.

Damage mechanisms include excessive mud and landslides in mines, flooding treatment ponds, and disrupted logistics to and from mines (Supply chain‑4). Landslides are of particular concern, as they could both disrupt the ongoing leaching process in the mine if leach holes collapse and prevent production after the landslide if on-site repair works are required before new leach holes are dug (for example, to make sure that the soil has stabilized).

This means a large landslide could disrupt production for up to 12 months in severely hit mines, though for most mines the disruption would be shorter if the landslide is shallow and only affects parts of the mine. Even a limited supply shortfall could cause prices to rise substantially (Supply chain‑5). During the supply crisis in 2010–11, prices of several rare earths increased more than ten times.

35 The supply crisis was caused by market fears and diplomatic tensions after China reduced export quotas from about 50 metric tons to about 30 metric tons. 36 According to Chinese authorities, environmental reasons and a crackdown on illegal mining caused the supply shortage. The magnitude of the global shortfall in production is uncertain as reliable data on the extent of the illegal mining prior to 2010 are scarce, but estimates range from 10 to 40 percent.

37 33 34 35 36 37 Richard Wartenburger et al., “Changes in regional climate extremes as a function of global mean temperature: An interactive plotting framework,” Geoscientific Model Development, September 2017, Volume 10, Number 9.

It is important to note that near-term regional projections of precipitation extremes have been assessed as highly sensitive to the influence of natural variability, particularly in lower latitudes, and therefore the 30-year projection is more robust than the decadal projection. Furthermore, there is recent evidence from observational records indicating that in many regions climate models may underestimate changes in precipitation volume.

For more details on the relevant uncertainties, please see: Ben Kirtman et al., “Near-term Climate Change: Projections and Predictability,” in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Thomas F. Stocker et al., eds., New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2014. Woods Hole Research Center. Molycorp, 2014.

March Humphries, Rare Earth Elements: The Global Supply Chain, Specialist in Energy Policy December 16, 2013. Wayne M. Morrison and Rachel Tang, China’s rare earth industry and export regime: Economic and trade implications for the United States, US Congressional Research Service, April 30, 2012; Xibo Wang et al., “Production forecast of China’s rare earths based on the Generalized Weng model and policy recommendations,” Resources Policy, March 2015, Volume 43.

Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 23 Case study Supply chain-4 The frequency of rainfall events in Southeast China with the potential to cause landslides in mines producing heavy rare earth metals is projected to continue to increase. Future and annual probability of extreme precipitation Defined as precipitation exceeding ~170mm per day Based on RCP 8.5 Multiple, compared to historic1 0–2.0x Today Increase from historical reference period (1951–81) to current (1998–2017).

2.1–3.0x 3.1–4.0x 4.1–5.0x >5.0x Number of mines producing heavy rare earths2 1 2030 Increase relative to historical reference period 2–3 4–9 >9 2050 Increase relative to historical reference period 1. Multiple relative to historical reference period (1951–81). 2. Map shows 66 of 67 mines producing heavy rare earth metals globally, representing >90% of global production; some mines producing light rare earths, e.g., Bayan Obo in Inner Mongolia, produce limited quantities of heavy rare earths.

Note: See the Technical Appendix for why we chose RCP 8.5. All projections based on RCP 8.5, CMIP 5 multimodel ensemble. Following standard practice, we define current and future (2030 and 2050) states as average climatic behavior over multidecade periods. Climate state today is defined as average conditions between 1998 and 2017, in 2030 as average between 2021 and 2040, and in 2050 between 2041 and 2060.

Source: Chinese Ministry of Information and Technology through NengApp.com; Woods Hole Research Center; McKinsey Global Institute analysis 24 McKinsey Global Institute Case study Supply chain-5 Supply shortfalls in rare earths could cause price spikes as happened in 2010–11.

STOXX Global Rare Earth Index prices for heavy rare earths Index: 100 = January 2010 Dysprosium 2,200 Yttrium Terbium 2,000 1,800 1,600 1,400 1,200 1,000 800 600 400 200 0 Jan 2010 Chinese government announces export quota restriction on rare earths Jun 10 Sep 10 Jan 2011 Chinese government announces rare earth export ban to Japan following diplomatic tensions Aug 11 35% reduction in Chinese export quotas kicks in Jan 2012 Aug 12 Jan 2013 Lynas opens rare earth mine in Mount Wells, Australia Molycorp reopens rare earth mine in Mountain Pass, California Jan 2014 Source: Croat, 2018; Lynas Corp.; Molycorp, 2014; New York Times; Wiley Rein Since the supply shortages, some rare earth consumers have attempted to build stockpiles in case of price spikes, but public data on the scale of the stockpiling are scarce.

For downstream players without substantial inventories, a price spike would mean they either have to reduce their consumption of heavy rare earths or increase their spending. A supply shortfall would be more critical for some heavy rare earths than others. Since the supply shortage in 2010–11, significant effort has been put into researching alternatives to rare earths, but with limited success in the key application areas.

Going forward, there is concern about whether supply can keep up with demand for the materials that are used in high-growth segments like cleantech and consumer electronics, as well as high-end segments like aerospace and defense and medical appliances. Disruptions from climatic disruptions will add extra pressure to a supply chain that has little to no slack.

This particularly applies to dysprosium (used in batteries, wind turbines, electric vehicles, and missile guidance systems), erbium (used in fiber optics), and terbium and yttrium (used in display electronics and low energy lighting). All of these materials are further used in high-end electronics (for example, for radiation detection equipment and X-ray screens) as well as glass coloring.

Of these, dysprosium, terbium, and yttrium, together with the light rare earths neodymium and europium, are considered “critical to advancement in a clean energy future” by the Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 25 US Department of Energy.

38 In the case of a supply shortfall, prices of these materials would be particularly likely to spike, and customers with low inventories and low willingness to pay would have to reduce their consumption through lower quality substitutes or reduced output.

Downstream players dependent on rare earths can protect themselves from climate-changeinduced physical risk by raising inventory levels at the cost of additional working capital and storage space needed, similar to the semiconductor example above. Rare earth miners can also adapt in other ways, for example, by using different leaching products and processes that decrease the risk of landslides or moving leach holes away from the steepest slopes.

We estimate these measures could increase COGS by less than 5 percent. Other adaptation measures could slightly decrease the output of the mines: one option would be to select sites in areas with a lower concentration of mines in order to diversify risk, even if these mines have marginally lower potential. For example, Yunnan and Hunan have less than 2 mines today, while there are more than 54 mines in Jiangxi.

Finally, if extreme rainfall is expected, miners could extract the leach in the most mature leach holes ahead of schedule. This would limit destruction of work in progress inventory when the rainfall turns mines to mud. All adaptation measures mentioned could be implemented in the short term and would eliminate about 50 to 80 percent of risk for rare earth miners, according to our estimates.

There is significant potential for industries to adapt and strengthen supply chains in the face of growing climate risks Supply chains and the infrastructure that supports them are designed for a stable climate. As hazards evolve, it will be necessary to increase investment in adaptation, possibly at the expense of efficiency. Risk diagnostics should be a major consideration for many players.

To successfully increase climate resilience, supply chain managers should first identify which of their suppliers (and their suppliers’ suppliers, and so on) are critical for business continuity, and what level of climate hazard these suppliers face. Based on this information, an assessment can be made of where the largest risks lie in the supply chain from climate-related hazards.

This is a non-trivial task: the many possible permutations and layers in supply chains, the interdependencies of supply and demand and the vast optionality of different adaptation measures at different points all create significant complexity. Investments in digital analytics to understand datadriven simulations of alternate adaptation and risk scenarios may be beneficial.

No-regret moves include: identifying and prioritizing key risks, having adequate insurance coverage, setting up a war room and practicing simulations, and closer collaboration between suppliers and buyers. While any individual action is insufficient to eliminate the supply disruption risk entirely, a combination of adaptive actions can limit the risk significantly.

We find significant potential for many industries to adapt in the next decade, and indeed this is already underway in some areas, including from public authorities, suppliers in high-hazard locations, and customers in downstream sectors. For example, a leading global manufacturing conglomerate has increased stocks of critical inputs and has entered contingency plan agreements with suppliers to ensure they get allocation of available supplies following a disaster.

39 A global agricultural business is diversifying its raw material sourcing across different geographies and its industrial activities across crops, to reduce the impact of local crop failures (for example, from unusual local weather conditions). 38 39 26 Nawshad Haque et al., “Rare earth elements: Overview of mining, mineralogy, uses, sustainability and environmental impact,” Resources, October 2014, Volume 3, Number 4.

Weathering the storm: Building business resilience to climate change, Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, July 2013.

McKinsey Global Institute Broader adaptation measures we identify include: — Protecting supply chain assets: For rare earth metals, this may include selecting leaching chemicals that degrade the structural stability of the soil as little as possible; putting lids on treatment ponds; limiting the slope around leach holes where possible; and extracting leach from near-mature leach holes in advance of major rainfalls.

For semiconductors, this may include strengthening the inner shell around the clean rooms where critical manufacturing equipment and WIP inventory are kept; elevating the facility to stay above likely flood levels; or designing the facility so the most critical equipment is on the higher floors.

Approaches to protecting assets should be considered as early as possible in the asset lifecycle, as tightening design standards will be cheaper than hardening assets after they are constructed in most cases.

— Redesigning supply chain operations: Working to improve the extreme weather preparedness of suppliers could help by encouraging suppliers to keep reserve capacity of critical supplies on-site, increase flexibility of production so it can continue even through a minor asset damage, or hold a war chest to be able to invest quickly to repair damages after a natural disaster.

Downstream players can increase the safety stock of critical inputs to ensure their production continues even if the supply chain is interrupted. In addition, it is helpful to keep an overview of all relevant inventory in the entire supply chain, as there may be additional inventory at supplier sites or in transit.

— Reducing exposure by creating alternatives: By avoiding co-locating with a large share of suppliers or helping specialized suppliers select plant locations with low climate hazard, risk could be reduced. Finding ways to invest in spare production capacity to be able to ramp up if one supplier is disrupted is another option. Where possible, companies could source commoditized, generic parts and avoid at-risk materials or products.

An option includes increasing modularity in product design to make it possible to replace parts with near substitutes without implications for other parts. — Allocating risk by using financial and contractual mechanisms: Suppliers should consider hedging commodity price extreme risks to limit the impact of price volatility, engaging in long-term fixed-price contracts with resilient commodity suppliers to prevent price flareups in a disaster, and investing in insurance to help recoup repair costs.

— Shoring up supply chain infrastructure: Supply chains are also heavily exposed to infrastructure risk.

Actions that can be taken to adapt include investment in understanding granular local hazards and infrastructure vulnerabilities to help businesses and communities adapt; organizing public-private partnerships to foster collaboration on climate change adaptation for exposed infrastructure; investing in infrastructure hardening to increase resistance to extreme weather; developing urban drainage solutions to limit future flood levels; and investing in early warning systems to alert the public when there is imminent risk of extreme weather events.

Not all actions will make sense for each supply chain category, as there often is a tradeoff between efficiency and resilience. For example, dual-sourcing may not make sense if economies of scale are too large, as often is the case in pharmaceuticals or aerospace.

Building safety stock may be too costly if holding costs are high (for example, airplane fuselage), inventory depreciation is high (for example, in semiconductors due to rapid innovation lifecycles) or if there already is a supply backlog meaning building inventory would limit current sales. There are “win-wins,” however—some actions that increase resiliency can also increase efficiency or product quality.

For instance, increasing modularity can make it easier to innovate and improve product design, because the design of each part Climate risk and response | Case study: Supply chains 27 is less constrained by the other parts. For downstream players, this could also help provide broader diversification opportunities across different suppliers and help reduce procurement costs.

Similarly, closer collaboration with suppliers of single-sourced inputs can both enable resilience and offer opportunities for co-innovation through co-investing in asset hardening measures. Industry 4.0 technologies could help support companies in achieving resilience as well as efficiency; for example, through improving transparency in supply chains, and in some cases, potentially changing the economics of production.

28 McKinsey Global Institute McKinsey Global Institute August 2020 Copyright © McKinsey & Company Designed by the McKinsey Global Institute www.mckinsey.com/mgi @McKinsey @McKinsey

Finance and Economics Discussion Series Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. ISSN 1936-2854 (Print) ISSN 2767-3898 (Online) Climate Change and Adaptation in Global Supply-Chain Networks Nora M.C. Pankratz and Christoph M. Schiller 2022-056 Please cite this paper as: Pankratz, Nora M.C., and Christoph M. Schiller (2022). “Climate Change and Adaptation in Global Supply-Chain Networks,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-056.

Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2022.056. NOTE: Staff working papers in the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) are preliminary materials circulated to stimulate discussion and critical comment. The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors.

References in publications to the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (other than acknowledgement) should be cleared with the author(s) to protect the tentative character of these papers. Climate Change and Adaptation in Global Supply-Chain Networks Nora M.C. Pankratz∗ Christoph M. Schiller† August 16, 2022 Abstract This paper examines how physical climate risks affect firms’ financial performance and operational risk management in global supply-chains.

We document that weather shocks at supplier locations reduce the operating performance of suppliers and their customers. Further, customers respond to perceived changes in suppliers’ climate-risk exposure: When realized shocks exceed ex-ante expectations, customers are 6-11% more likely to terminate existing supplier-relationships.

Consistent with models of experience-based learning, this effect increases with signal strength and repetition, is insensitive to long-term climate projections, and increases with industry competitiveness and decreases with supply-chain integration. Customers subsequently choose replacement suppliers with lower expected climate-risk exposure. Keywords: Climate Change, Adaptation, Firm Performance, Production Networks.

JEL Codes: G15, Q54, G30, F64 We thank Alan Barreca, Jaap Bos, Claudia Custodio (discussant), Hasan Fallahgoul (discussant), Caroline Flammer, Martin Götz, Adel Guitouni (discussant), John Hassler (discussant), Alexander Hillert, Marcin Kacperczyk, Taehyun Kim (discussant), Thomas Mosk, Jisung Park, Sébastien Pouget, Julien Sauvagnat (discussant), and Sumudu Watugala (discussant) for many valuable suggestions.

We also thank the participants at the 2020 AEA Annual Meeting, EFA Meeting, SHOF-ECGI Conference on Finance and Sustainability, 2019 LBS Summer Finance Symposium, the IWFSAS, GRASFI, EDHEC Finance of Climate Change, and the Paris December Finance Meeting and seminars at the UC Environmental Economics Working Group, Boston University, Deutsche Bundesbank, European Central Bank, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, Imperial College, Ivey Business School, Queen’s University, Stockholm School of Economics, University of Zurich, UCLA, Arizona State University, the University of San Francisco, Maastricht University, and Goethe Universität Frankfurt for many helpful comments.

Nora Pankratz thanks the French Social Investment Forum (FIR) and the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) for a dissertation award received in 2020, and Christoph Schiller thanks the Canadian Securities Institute (CSI) for financial support in 2018. Nora Pankratz worked on this project prior to employment at the Federal Reserve Board, while a Ph.D. candidate at Maastricht University (UM) and as a Postdoctoral Researcher at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).

Christoph Schiller worked on this project prior to employment at Arizona State University, while a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Toronto (UofT). Data sources were obtained under purview of UM, UCLA, and UofT. All remaining errors are our own. ∗ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. All views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve System. Email: nora.m.pankratz@frb.gov. † Arizona State University (ASU), W.P.

Carey School of Business. Email: christoph.schiller@asu.edu. Data Acknowledgements This study contains modified Copernicus Climate Change Service Information [2020]. Neither the European Commission nor ECMWF is responsible for any use that may be made of the Copernicus Information or data it contains.

Further, we acknowledge the World Climate Research Programme’s Working Group on Coupled Modelling, which is responsible for CMIP, and we thank the climate modeling group at the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology for producing and making available their model output.

For CMIP the U.S. Department of Energy’s Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison provides coordinating support and led development of software infrastructure in partnership with the Global Organization for Earth System Science Portals. Moreover, we are thankful to the Darthmouth Flood Observatory (DFO) as well as the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) for providing data from the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT).

1 Introduction Businesses face increasing pressure to address their operational exposure to physical climate risks.

While managers and investors are looking for ways to alleviate climate change risks by adapting their operations (Lin, Schmid, and Weisbach, 2020) and investments (Krueger, Sautner, and Starks, 2020; Ilhan, Krueger, Sautner, and Starks, 2020), academic research has primarily studied how transitory weather shocks affect firms’ earnings (Addoum, Ng, and Ortiz-Bobea, 2020), stock returns (Kumar, Xin, and Zhang, 2019), and labor and capital productivity (Graff-Zivin, Hsiang, and Neidell, 2018; Zhang et al., 2018), among others.

Much less is known about how firms adapt to climate change, despite the fact that firms’ endogenous responses to physical climate risks are crucial to understanding the long-run effects of climate change on financial market outcomes. Operational risk management in response to climate change is particularly important for firms engaged in extensive international production networks.

In a globalized economy, supply-chains often move through parts of the world that are most vulnerable to the impact of climate change. As a result, firms might be indirectly exposed to physical risks due to their suppliers. Reflecting these concerns, over 50% of CEOs mentioned risks posed to their global supply chains by climate change as one of their primary concerns in a recent survey (PWC, 2015).

However, adapting to climate change is a complex task for economic agents in general and firms in supply-chain organizations in particular. Climate change is characterized by unknowable uncertainty – particularly in the short- and medium-run – as weather realizations provide a noisy signal of potential changes in the underlying distribution (Deryugina, 2013; Kala, 2019). Further, indirect exposure to physical climate risks due to suppliers and customers can be challenging to identify.

In this environment, it is unclear how weather shocks affect firms’ expectations of climate risks and, as a consequence, the adjustment of their supply-chain networks. In this paper, we study whether firms adjust their supply-chain networks in response to perceived changes in their suppliers’ exposure to physical climate risks. First, we establish that the financial consequences of weather shocks propagate from suppliers to their corporate customers around the world.

Next, we investigate if and how firms adapt their supply-chain organizations in response to changes in supplier exposure. In particular, we examine how discrepancies between realized and expected weather shocks affect the continuation of existing and the initiation of new supply-chain 1 relationships.

Our main contribution is to show that customers are more likely to terminate suppliers when climate-related shocks increase beyond historical expectations, and switch to replacements in less exposed climate zones. Our study provides novel evidence on how changes in perceived climate risk affect firms’ operational risk management and the formation of global supply-chains.

We combine detailed firm-level supply-chain data from FactSet Revere with financial performance data from Worldscope, geographic location and establishment-level data from FactSet Fundamentals and Orbis, data on local temperatures from the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts, floods from the Darthmouth Flood Observatory, and temperature projections computed in the framework of the fifth phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5).

Our supply-chain dataset includes 5,628 (8,200) unique supplier (customer) firms, comprising over 500,000 quarterly supplier-customer observations across 92 (74) countries around the world, over the period from 2003 to 2016. We focus on two types of weather shocks – heat and floods – for the following reasons. First, the literature in physiology and economics has documented several channels through which temperatures affect firm productivity.

For example, heat reduces worker performance (Graff-Zivin et al., 2018), labor supply (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014), and firm-level output (Zhang et al., 2018), with sharp declines at temperatures over 30◦ C. These risks are expected to increase, as the number of heat days (i.e. days that exceed 100◦ F) is projected to rise from currently 1% of days to more than 15% of days by 2099 without substantial efforts to reduce emissions (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014).

Second, flooding incidents can cause enormous economic damage. According to FEMA, the U.S. suffered more than $260 billion in flood-related damages between 1980 and 2013. Both inland and coastal floods are expected to become more frequent and severe due to climate change (CSSR, 2017). Third, extreme heat and floods differ in their duration and impact on physical and human capital, allowing us to study differences in firms’ adaption across different types of physical climate risks.

We begin by examining if firms face financial incentives to adapt their supply-chain organizations due to the heat and flood exposure of their suppliers.

Whereas Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) and Carvalho, Nirei, Saito, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2021) show that the effect of large-scale natural disasters can propagate through production networks, it is unclear if other weather shocks – which are projected to change heterogeneously around the world but are too small to be classified as disasters 2 – cause similar distortions.1 Heat and floods might reduce supplier productivity or impose additional costs for suppliers, for example by increasing air conditioning or clean-up costs.

This can affect customer profits, especially if frictions such as relationship-specific investments prevent customer firms from making operational adjustments in the short-run. However, customers’ operational risk management strategies could insulate them against disruptions, and suppliers may not be able to pass on increased costs downstream. Following the literature (e.g.

Dell, Jones, and Olken, 2014; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015a; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016; Auffhammer, 2018), we construct location-specific measures of heat and flood exposure for our sample of suppliers based on daily temperatures and inundation records over a given quarter in the location of firms’ production facilities. Consistent with Somanathan et al. (2015), Zhang et al. (2018), and Pankratz et al.

(2019), we find a significant negative effect of high temperatures and floods on supplier operating performance.2 This effect is stronger for geographically concentrated suppliers, and firms in industries which have been shown to be vulnerable to climate risks such as agriculture, mining, and construction (Addoum et al., 2019). Next, we document that weather shocks to suppliers negatively affect the performance of their customers.

Following the occurrence of prolonged periods of heat in a given firm-quarter at supplier locations, customer revenues (operating income) over assets decrease by 0.3% (0.9%) relative to the sample mean.

When suppliers are affected by a local flooding incident, customer revenue and operating income are reduced by 1.6% and 6%, respectively, with a lag of up to four quarters.3 Further, we find that a customer’s ability to source inputs from alternative sources mitigates the propagation of supplier disruptions. Our main analysis focuses on the question of whether and how firms learn about climate change and adapt their supply-chains when global climate risk exposure changes.

Given that short- and medium-term weather realizations provide noisy signals for the underlying distribution, detecting changes in climate risk is challenging. Prior research in finance and economics has proposed experience-based Bayesian updating to model learning in general (Alevy, Haigh, and List, 2007; Previous research has found mixed results on the effects of extreme temperatures on firm productivity. While Addoum et al.

(2020) find no statistically significant link between temperatures and establishment-level sales, other studies document heterogeneous but largely adverse effects of heat on firm productivity and financial performance (Somanathan, Somanathan, Sudarshan, and Tewari, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Pankratz, Bauer, and Derwall, 2019; Addoum, Ng, and Ortiz-Bobea, 2019; Custodio, Ferreira, Garcia-Appendini, and Lam, 2020).

2 We conduct a series of robustness tests using various absolute and relative measures of heat exposure. 3 We do not find evidence that such decreases are compensated in later financial quarters. 1 3 Chiang, Hirshleifer, Qian, and Sherman, 2011), and about climate change in particular (Kelly, Kolstad, and Mitchell, 2005; Deryugina, 2013; Moore, 2017; Kala, 2019; Choi, Gao, and Jiang, 2020).

We follow this literature and conjecture that when entering a supplier relationship, customers trade off perceived costs and benefits such as climate risks, product quality, and input prices of prospective suppliers based on observable characteristics. Under basic assumptions about production and input markets, prices and quantities of inputs and the matches of customers to suppliers are determined in equilibrium, and reflect the underlying probabilities of heat and flooding events.

In this setting, adverse weather shocks in line with the expected distribution would not affect the longevity of supply chain relations. However, if firms perceive that the underlying distribution of weather shocks may have changed, the original supplier choice may no longer be optimal. Hence, existing supplier-relations may be terminated more frequently when climate-related shocks observed over the course of a supply-chain relationship exceed ex-ante anticipated risks.

To test this idea, we construct a measure of realized vs. expected climate risk by comparing heat and flood days before and during any given supply-chain relationship. We document a large, positive effect of climate risk exceedance on supplier termination. Our results show that a supply-chain link is 6.1-7.8 (7.9-11.1) percent more likely to be terminated in a given year, if the realized exposure to heat (floods) exceeds proxies of customers’ ex-ante expectations.

This result is robust to alternative benchmark periods, and holds controlling for industry and country-by-time fixed effects for suppliers and customers. Further, the effect is stronger for suppliers in competitive industries and weaker for closely integrated supply-chains. We find similar results implementing our tests as linear probability models, logistic regressions, and as Cox proportional hazard models.

In line with with models of experience-based learning (Deryugina, 2013), our results show that the likelihood of supplier termination is increasing in signal strength and repetition, i.e. the magnitude and number of times realized weather shocks exceeded prior expectations. Moreover, consistent with customer learning and inconsistent with explanations related to supply-side terminations, we find an economically small effect of transitory shocks on supply-chain terminations.

In addition, our results are unaffected by excluding delisted suppliers. While our main tests reflect the idea that firms form priors and update their beliefs based on observable shocks, we also consider the role of long-term climate projections.

Using model output from the CMIP5 project, we obtain projections for the average number of heat days between 2040 4 and 2059.4 We then estimate our main tests for subsamples of suppliers for which long-term climate models project minimal changes under various emission trajectories.

We find that customers strongly respond to short-run increases in weather shocks beyond ex-ante expectations even when long-run projections indicate little to no change, which may emphasize the challenges of learning about climate change based on perceived changes in the distribution of weather shocks. Last, we examine if firms consider suppliers’ potential exposure when switching to new suppliers.

For this purpose, we identify ‘replacement’ suppliers as firms with identical 4-digit SIC codes as the terminated suppliers which entered a new supplier-relationship with the same customer within one year. We estimate linear probability models to test if replacement suppliers have a lower exposure to heat and floods than terminated suppliers conditional on realized vs. expected weather shocks during the terminated supplier relationship.

For heat, we find a positive effect of climate-risk exceedance on the likelihood that customers choose a replacement supplier with lower ex-post exposure observed both during as well as after the initial relationship.

An unexpectedly high number of shocks during the initial relationship increases the probability that the customer chooses a less exposed replacement supplier by 6 to 10 percentage points, controlling for industry- and country-specific time fixed effects of both suppliers and customers. We find a smaller, less precisely estimated effect for floods and when considering climate risk based on long-term projections.

Our paper contributes to the literature on climate change, finance, and economics along several dimensions. First, our paper provides novel evidence on the implications of climate change for firms and investors.

Previous research in finance has studied the direct effects of weather shocks on firm profitability (Zhang et al., 2018; Addoum et al., 2020; Pankratz et al., 2019), housing prices (Baldauf, Garlappi, and Yannelis, 2020), stock returns (Kumar et al., 2019), financial markets (Hong, Li, and Xu, 2019; Schlenker and Taylor, 2019), and capital structure (Ginglinger and Moreau, 2019).

We add to this literature by showing that firms can be indirectly exposed to physical climate risks due to their global supplier network. This aspect of our findings is most closely related to Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019), and Carvalho et al. (2021), who document the propagation of natural disasters along firm linkages.

In contrast to these studies, we focus on weather events that are less severe than natural disasters but closely tied to long-term We access projections through the ECMWF. They are part of the CMIP5 project, which is the primary source of climate data for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Reports. 4 5 climate change, allowing us to explicitly examine long-run projections and changes in the underlying distribution of events.

Second, our paper is among the first in the finance and environmental economics literature to study how firms learn about and adapt to climate change. In recent work, Lin et al.

(2020) show that electricity providers increase investments in flexible power plants in response to long-term changes in local climate, Li, Lin, Jin, and Zhang (2020) document a negative effect of changes in long-term climate conditions on local employment, and Li, Shan, Tang, and Yao (2020) find that firms with high climate uncertainty increase their capital investments.

Our paper is part of this emerging literature by studying firms’ endogenous responses to indirect climate risk exposure in a unique empirical setting, using a framework of experience-based learning about climate change. Third, we contribute to the literature on learning about climate change. Choi et al. (2020) find that market participants revise their beliefs about climate change when experiencing unusual weather using Google search data.

Deryugina (2013) uses survey data on beliefs about global warming to show that local temperature fluctuations affect these beliefs in a Bayesian framework. Moore (2017) and Kala (2019) develop and test theoretical models on experience-based learning about climate change. Our work builds on these theoretical frameworks but explores learning and adaptation outside of the agricultural sector, combining both observed signals and climate projections.

Our main finding on the adaptation of supply chains to physical risks has potentially important implications, as the areas of the world which are disproportionately affected by the impact of climate change are already less developed today (Burke et al., 2015b; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016). Hence, our findings also speak to the growing literature on endogenous production networks and macroeconomic growth and productivity (e.g.

Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot, 2017; Lim, 2018; Oberfield, 2018; Acemoglu and Azar, 2020). 2 Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics We combine data on global supply-chains, firm financial performance, and local climate exposure from four main sources. In the following sections we describe these sources, explain how we link the individual datasets, and provide summary statistics for our main sample.

Throughout the paper, we provide relevant summary statistics and details in the context of the respective empirical tests. 6 2.1 Global Supply Chains We obtain data on customer-supplier relationships from FactSet Revere. Previous related research (e.g.

Hertzel, Li, Officer, and Rodgers, 2008; Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Banerjee, Dasgupta, and Kim, 2008; Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016) has primarily relied on SEC regulation S-K, which requires U.S. firms to disclose customers which account for at least 10% of their total sales. In contrast, the Revere data includes both U.S. and foreign firms and does not require sales volumes to exceed 10%.

This is important, because many of the regions most vulnerable to climate change are located outside of the United States. Further, the research relying on SEC regulation has been unable to study the termination of supplier-customer relationships, since the appearance and disappearance of links due to actual starts and ends of relationships cannot be distinguished from changes in the relative sales volumes around the reporting threshold.

The Revere supply-chain data is hand-collected, verified, and updated by FactSet analysts relying on a range of primary sources of information, including companies’ annual reports and SEC filings, investor presentations, company websites and press releases, supply contracts, and purchase obligations. Nonetheless, the data captures only a subsample of global supply-chain relationships. First, we require financial and accounting data for our sample firms, limiting the sample to listed firms.

Smaller, private firms may be more strongly affected by weather shocks if such firms are geographically more concentrated and more financially constrained. Therefore, we might observe a lower bound of the effect of heat and flooding on firms in our analysis. Second, the heterogeneity in the availability of financial data around the world is likely to bias the sample towards firms in developed markets.

In total, we obtain a sample of 8,200 (5,769) unique customer (supplier) firms from 74 (92) countries, comprising almost 595,000 supplier-customer pair-year-quarter observations over the sample period from 2003 to 2017. As Figures 1a and 1b show, most suppliers are located in Asia (40.3%), North Americas (38.8%), and Europe (17.4%). Previous studies have shown stronger effects of weather shocks on economic output in less developed economies (Burke et al., 2015b).

Hence, our findings may underestimate the effects of disruptions in less developed markets. Table 1 documents the industry composition of our sample. Most of the suppliers and customers in our sample operate in manufacturing (SIC 1st digits 2 and 3) or transport and utilities (SIC 1st digit 4). Tables 2a and 2b report summary statistics at the supplier and customer level. Table 2c presents relationship-level 7 summary statistics for the firm-pairs in our sample. In line with prior research (e.g.

Banerjee et al., 2008), we document an asymmetric mutual importance between customers and their suppliers in our sample. First, sample customer firms are much larger than their suppliers. The median customer holds 19 times the assets of the median supplier firm (book value of assets).

Second, for firm-pairs where detailed sales data from the supplier to the customer is available (less than 10% of the sample), the customers on average represent 18.6% of the suppliers’ total sales, but sales from the suppliers only account for 2.06% of the customers’ cost of goods sold. 2.2 Accounting Performance and Firm Characteristics Next, we obtain quarterly financial performance data from 2000 to 2016 from Worldscope.

Our main variables of interest for measuring operating firm performance in Section 3.1 are quarterly revenues and operating income, scaled by one-year lagged total assets. In addition, we obtain information on firms’ financial reporting schedules to ensure that we correctly match climate and performance records when financial quarters deviate from calendar quarters.

We additionally collect data on asset tangibility, defined as the ratio of property, plants, and equipment (PPE) to total assets, operating margin, inventory, accounts receivables, and cost of goods sold (COGS), and delisting dates from Worldscope and Datastream. Further, we construct measures of industry competitiveness as the number of firms in a given SIC 2-digit code industry in the universe of Compustat Global firms.

From the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) we obtain input-output matrices for 2012 and use this data to construct “industry-level input concentration” as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of dollar values across all input industries for each customer industry. To ensure that international financial records are comparable, we convert all variables into U.S. dollars. To remove outliers, we winsorize all variables above (below) the 99th (1st) percentile.

We further drop firms with incomplete records of financial information and exclude firms in the financial industry (SIC code between 6000 and 6999). 2.3 Firm Locations We obtain information on the location of firms’ operations from two different sources, FactSet Fundamentals and Orbis. First, we use the addresses of firm headquarters from FactSet as our primary measure for firm location. Of course, firms’ plants and establishments might be located 8 remote from headquarters.

Hence, we collect information on additional firm locations from Orbis. In total, we obtain 1.1 million addresses of locations of incorporated subsidiaries, branches, and establishments.5 We transform city, zip code, and street names into coordinates using the Bing Maps API. To obtain a measure of geographic concentration, we calculate the share of firm establishments located within a 30km radius of the firm’s headquarters.

Next, we apply two location-based data filters to our main sample: First, we remove dispersed firms with fewer than 10% of assets within 30km of the firms’ headquarters.

We choose this cutoff following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), who limit their sample to firms with at least 10% of employees at the headquarter locations.6 Second, we drop all supplier-customer-pairs with headquarter locations within 500km of each other to limit the potential for firms to be affected by the same shocks.7 2.4 Temperatures, Floods, and Climate Projections We study two of the most pervasive types of shocks related to climate change – extreme heat and floods – which are both projected to become more frequent and severe in the near future (CSSR, 2017).

8 While both extreme heat and floods can cause significant economic damage (see e.g. Graff-Zivin et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018), the two types of weather shocks possibly affect firms’ operating performance and resulting propagation effects through different channels. This allows us to compare how different weather shocks affect supply-chain formation, and use the heterogeneity in the magnitudes and channels to assess the plausibility of our results.

To capture both the occurrence and intensity of these shocks, we use the number of days on which firms were affected by high heat or floods per financial quarter as our main measures. 5 In principle, these addresses could encompass the headquarters of incorporated subsidiaries with additional facilities. Apart from other data limitations, the data may therefore not represent the universe of firms’ locations.

6 We choose to restrict the sample of firms instead of aggregating shocks across locations, as the lack of consistent data on the scope of economic activity across facilities makes it difficult to aggregate shocks across locations for each firm in a meaningful way. In principle, we could attempt to aggregate shocks across locations using equal weighting. However, we observe a large number of small locations, i.e. sales locations and dealerships in the case of car manufacturers.

Hence, equal weighting is conceptually inaccurate, and the value of pursuing this approach is unclear as we could not distinguish actual null results from null results caused by incomplete observations of locations and inaccurate weighting. The drawback of our approach is that measures of heat and flood exposure based on headquarters are observed with noise, even after filtering out dispersed firms.

However, the direction of this potential measurement error is likely to bias our estimates in Sections 3.1 and 4 against finding significant effects. 7 As we discuss below, this filter is crucial for upholding the exclusion restriction. In robustness tests, we test the sensitivity of our results to the threshold, and find very similar results when we impose a distance of 1000km instead.

8 In contrast, other types of natural disasters such as earthquakes and broad groupings of different hazard types, which have been frequently studied in the literature, cannot be unambiguously linked to climate change. 9 2.4.1 Temperatures We construct measures of firms’ exposure to high temperatures at the firm-quarter-level from location-specific information on daily maximum temperatures.

For this purpose, we rely on the ERA5 re-analysis database from the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts (ECMWF).9 The dataset provides global, daily coverage of a 0.25 × 0.25° latitude-longitude grid, and is available starting in 1979 (Hersbach 2016). We match daily maximum temperatures to customer and supplier firms using the closest ERA5 grid node and convert temperatures from Kelvin to Celsius.

Our main measure of high heat exposure is based on the literature on physiology, temperatures, and labor productivity (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014; Burke et al., 2015b; Carleton and Hsiang, 2016; Sepannen, Fisk, and Lei, 2006), which documents a sharp decline in worker performance for temperatures above 30° C. Similarly, the National Weather Service defines a heatwave based on a sequence of days with temperatures exceeding a threshold of 90° F (32° C).

Hence, we use a daily maximum temperature of 30° Celsius as our main temperature threshold to define a day as hot. In extensive robustness tests, we also combine this absolute threshold with relative definitions of high temperatures based on season- and location-specific historical temperature distributions. Accounting for firms’ reporting schedules, we sum the number of days on which firms are affected by high temperatures per financial quarter as our main measure of heat exposure.

In addition, we construct a measure of local heatwaves by identifying spells of seven or more consecutive days with daily maximum temperatures over 30° Celsius. Table 2d shows the related summary statistics. 2.4.2 Floods Second, we obtain data on exceptional global surface water levels to determine whether firms are affected by flooding incidents in a given quarter.

While surface temperatures are the most commonly cited consequence of global climate change, the scientific literature also indicates that flooding incidents will increase in frequency and severity, i.e. due to heavy rainfall, rapid melting of snow and ice, and parched soil (CSSR, 2017).

We gather information on floods from the Dartmouth Flood Observatory (DFO), which uses Re-analyses are generated by interpolating local temperatures based on data from existing weather stations and a number of other atmospheric data sources based on scientifically established climate models. 9 10 satellite images and remote sensing sources to identify inundated areas.

In addition, the DFO collects information on floods from news and governmental sources, and spatially maps materially affected areas.10 The dataset includes start and end dates for each flood, detailed geographical information on the inundated areas from 1984 until today, and information on the associated damages, size of the affected area, and deaths. Based on the provided flood polygons, we spatially match the coordinates of our sample firms to the flooded areas.

Compared to the country-level flooding data used in previous research, this approach allows us to determine more precisely if firm locations were inundated. Similar to Section 2.4.1, we compute the number of days on which a firm was exposed to flooding during each financial quarter, and additionally aggregate the incidence, count, and severity indicators of floods on a quarterly basis as alternative measures. Table 2d shows flood-related summary statistics at the firm-quarter level.

On average, suppliers are exposed to floods in 6.4% of all firm-quarters.11 Conditional on occurrence, floods in our sample last 10.74 days on average. 2.4.3 Temperature Projections Third, we use data on temperature projections from the fifth phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5).

The CMIP5 data are used extensively in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment Reports, and daily projections are made accessible by the ECMWF.12 To make our measures of realized temperatures comparable with the projections, we calculate the projected change at supplier locations as the average number of days over 30° Celsius modelled from 2006 to 2019 and mid-century between 2040 to 2059.

Moreover, we obtain climate projections following the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 2.6, 4.5, and 8.5, which provide different pathways of the future climate. The RCP 8.5 comes closest to a ‘business as usual scenario’, which assumes very limited policy interventions directed at emissions reduction.

To capture cross-sectional variation in the projected change of temperatures, we obtain data for the The DFO data includes both granular inundations and hand-mapped flood polygons which cover entire continents. To remove extremely large polygons which are unlikely to reflect firms’ actual physical exposures, we limit the sample to floods which exceed 333km in width. As this exclusion is discretionary, we test the sensitivity of the results to the filter.

We find very similar results for a more restrictive limitation of floods which do not exceed 100km in width. 11 The frequency of flood events in DFO appears plausible compared to the matched sample of firm-quarters with EM-DAT disaster data (44% of firm-quarters instead of 6%). Of course, country-level information may overstate the extent to which firms are affected if flood events only affect parts of the country.

At the same time, only a subset of the DFO flood events is registered in EM-DAT, as only incidents which caused ten or more casualties, affected more than 100 people, lead to a state of emergency, or resulted in a call for international assistance are recorded. 12 An overview of various aspects of CMIP5 is provided by Hurrell, Visbeck, and Pirani (2011), and the primary reference for experiment design is Taylor, Stouffer, and Meehl (2012).

10 11 periods from 2006 to 2019 and 2040 to 2059 from the MPI-ESM-LR model and average estimated exposure across all available ensemble members. 2.4.4 Natural Disasters For comparison and robustness tests in Section 3.1, we also include data from the international disaster database EM-DAT, provided by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED, 2011).

EM-DAT is one of the most commonly used global databases in the literature on the economic cost of natural disasters.13 We distinguish if the temperature-related EM-DAT events are heatwaves or cold spells, and aggregate flood and heat events at the firm quarter-level.

3 Physical Climate Risk and Firm Performance 3.1 Direct Exposure to Weather Shocks Our main tests on the adaptation of supply chains rely on the assumption that heat and flood events have economically important direct and indirect effects. To validate this assumption, we first examine how these shocks affect supplier performance. Our two main variables for measuring firm operating performance are revenues and operating income scaled by assets.

In all tests, we lag assets by one year to ensure that our results are not confounded by potential direct effects on assets.14 Of course, climate exposure and firm financial performance are likely endogenous in the crosssection. For example, if firms organize production to maximize profits and weather shocks affect financial performance, managers may choose production locations based on existing climatic conditions.

In contrast, both floods and heat days can only be predicted with precision over very short horizons (i.e. days in advance), which are unlikely to allow for substantial adjustment in production planning. Therefore, our empirical strategy aims to exploit short-term variation over time in weather shocks within firms, which are plausibly exogenous and randomly distributed conditional on firm locations and seasons.

To isolate this variation, we estimate OLS regressions with firm-by-fiscal-quarter fixed effects. See for example Strömberg (2007); Noy (2009); Lesk, Rowhani, and Ramankutty (2016). We focus on these two measures – as opposed to for example earnings – since revenues and operating income are less subject to firms’ strategic accounting choices. This consideration is important, as the incentive to smooth earnings might be particularly high following adverse financial shocks.

13 14 12 This empirical design is widely applied in environmental economics (Auffhammer, 2018; Dell et al., 2014; Kolstad and Moore, 2020) and serves two important goals: First, firm fixed effects absorb time-invariant and potentially endogenous firm-level characteristics. Second, by interacting firmwith quarter fixed effects, we mitigate concerns about potentially confounding firm-specific patterns of seasonality.

For example, certain types of firms earn higher revenues during the summer, which could mechanically be correlated with the incidence of weather shocks.15 Further, we follow the literature and include industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects to absorb any industry-specific time trends and patterns.

Since non-trivial changes to the climate might have occurred over our 15-year sample period, we also include country-specific linear trends to control for confounding simultaneous trends in local climate and firm performance. To address the possibility that heat and floods randomly coincide with changes in firm characteristics over time, we also introduce size-, age-, and profitability-specific time fixed effects.

For this purpose, we sort all firms into size, age, and profitability terciles, which we interact with with year-by-quarter fixed effects, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) (i.e. BS2016). We estimate models of the following form at the quarterly frequency: yit = 0 X βt × Wit + µiq(t) + γn(i)t + θd(i)t + δBS2016,t + ϵit (1) t=−3 where yit is either Revenue/Assets or Operating Income/Assets of firm i in period (i.e. yearquarter) t, Wit measures weather shocks, i.e.

the number of days on which firm i was exposed to heat and floods in t, respectively. µiq(t) are firm by fiscal-quarter fixed effects, γn(i)t are industry (of firm i) by year-quarter fixed effects based on 2-digit SIC codes, θd(i)t are country (of firm i) linear trends at the quarterly frequency, and δBS2016,t are firm size, age, and profitability terciles interacted with year-quarter fixed effects. Following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), we cluster robust standard errors at the firm level.

As it is ex-ante unclear if the financial impact of weather shocks manifests immediately or with some delay throughout the financial year, we include three lags of heat and flood days. [Insert Table 3 here.] 15 Since firms likely differ in these seasonal patterns, quarterly fixed effects alone are not sufficient to address this issue. 13 The results, reported in Table 3, indicate that both heat and floods adversely affect supplier performance in our sample.

In line with the findings of Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), the full effect materializes over the course of the financial year but dissipates after three quarters. Focusing on floods, one day of flooding at the firms’ headquarters is associated with an average decrease in Revenue/Assets of 0.074 percentage points. In comparison, the daily damage caused by high temperatures is smaller and translates to 0.042 percentage points.16 Compared to the average revenues over assets per day – i.e.

the quarterly value divided by the number of workdays per fiscal quarter – one additional flood day (heat day) represents a decrease in daily scaled revenue of 18% (12%). This magnitude is in line with effects of heat on worker performance documented in the literature. For example, according to Sepannen et al. (2006), an increase in temperatures from 25 to 30° C decreases task performance in an office environment by 10%.

Further, we find that one additional day of flooding (heat) decreases quarterly Operating Income/Assets by 0.019 (0.010) percentage points. These coefficients are economically meaningful: The standard deviation in the number of affected days conditional on the occurrence of a flood or heat event is 11.5 and 16.2 days, respectively.

Thereby, the effect translates to a 17.2% (12.69%) decrease for a one standard deviation increase in flood days (heat days).17 Given the larger effects on operating income compared to revenues, supplier profitability is likely affected both through cost and revenue channels. Focusing on heat, the literature has documented several economic channels driving aggregate economic losses.

For instance, electricity prices increase with heat exposure (Pechan and Eisenack, 2014), water supply tightens (Mishra and Singh, 2010), and both cognitive and physical labor productivity are compromised (Sepannen et al., 2006; Xiang, Bi, Pisaniello, and Hansen, 2014).

Compared to heat, floods have a more direct and lasting negative effect on physical capital, potentially damaging equipment, local infrastructure, and disrupting production.18 This is consistent with the larger negative operating performance effects of floods compared to heat documented in Table 3. In Appendix Table A2, we further examine the heterogeneity of heat and flood effects by industry.

For heat, we observe particularly pronounced effects in agriculture, transportation, manufacturing, These estimates are obtained by summing over the coefficient estimates for lags t = −4, ..., 0. In robustness tests we replace heat and flood days with counting variables indicating the number of weather shocks per financial quarter. Results are reported in Appendix Table A1 and corroborate the main result.

18 As the focus of our analysis lies on the indirect exposure to physical climate risk and adaptation of supply-chains, we do not aim to uncover the precise mechanics driving the directly observable effects in this paper. 16 17 14 mining and construction, and services.

These effects are in line with evidence on the negative effect of heat on crop yields, outdoors industries, and labor and capital productivity.19 For floods, we observe the strongest effects in industries with high asset tangibility, including mining and construction, manufacturing, and agriculture, consistent with the idea that floods primarily affect capital productivity.

A potential concern with our empirical design is that weather shocks are measured with error for firms with geographically dispersed production sites. We validate our choice of matching heat and floods with firms based on headquarter addresses by estimating the regression in Equation (1) for different subsamples of firms depending on their geographic concentration.

For this purpose, we collect information on 1.1 million locations of incorporated subsidiaries, branches, and establishments, and limit our sample to firms with at least 10% of assets within 30km of the firm’s headquarters.20 Figure 4 plots the results.

For both floods and heat, the effect is consistently negative and increases in magnitude with firm-level geographic concentration, providing supportive evidence for our location matching strategy.21 3.2 Indirect Exposure to Weather Shocks Next, we examine if heat and floods propagate along the supply-chain affecting the operations of downstream firms. Previous research (e.g.

Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Carvalho et al., 2021) has documented performance spillovers along the supply chain following large-scale natural disasters. In contrast to these shocks, heat and floods are closely linked to climate change. This is important since the frequency of heat and flood occurrences is expected to change heterogeneously across the world, and may lead firms to update their beliefs about the probability of their occurrence.

The downstream effects of weather shocks in production networks are theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, customers might already use risk management strategies such as multi-sourcing to mitigate the propagation of shocks to suppliers. Similarly, if suppliers’ bargaining power is small, their ability to pass on higher costs due to heat or flood exposure downstream may be limited. In both cases, heat- and flood-related distortions would not propagate along the supply-chain, and we See e.g.

Zhang et al., 2018; Sepannen et al., 2006; Somanathan et al., 2015; Burke and Emerick, 2016. The choice of this threshold is by nature arbitrary. We follow Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), who exclude firms with fewer than 10% of employees at the headquarter. 21 However, the differences have to be interpreted with some caution given that firms in different concentration quartiles might differ along other dimensions, which might in turn affect firms’ sensitivity to heat and floods.

19 20 15 should be unable to find a significant impact of climate shocks to suppliers on customer financial performance. On the other hand, even small shocks resulting from heat or floods could increase supplier costs, decrease production output, or cause supply-chain glitches, particularly given modern just-in-time production systems.

These disruptions are particularly likely to occur if the inputs have a high level of specificity (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016) or when customers’ ability to procure inputs from alternative sources is limited for other reasons. We empirically test these competing hypotheses by examining whether customers’ operating performance is affected by weather shocks to their suppliers. As in Section 3.1, we use revenue and operating income (scaled by lagged assets) as our two main dependent variables.

Since weather shocks to suppliers might distort and strain supply-chain operations in ways not reflected in financial performance, our tests likely understate the extent to which supplier-customer relationships are challenged by floods and high temperatures. Further, heat and floods do not only affect firms’ production facilities directly but also indirectly through transportation links and other local infrastructure (Boehm et al., 2019; Carvalho et al., 2021).

Since the main focus of our analysis is on supply-chain adaptation, we do not aim to distinguish between immediate and indirect disruptions of our sample suppliers in this analysis, as customers would have a strong incentive to mitigate spillovers due to either type of disruption. Our primary identifying assumption is that weather shocks are drawn randomly from the underlying distribution over short horizons.

We rely on this variation for causal interpretation of the observed effects by estimating OLS regressions with firm-by-quarter fixed effects to account for any firm-specific seasonal patterns.

Hence, our results are identified from within-firm variation in local climate realizations of remote suppliers.22 We further saturate our model with industryby-year-quarter fixed effects and country-specific time trends to account for time-series patterns at the industry level and long-term trends in local climate, as in Equation (1).

Therefore, even if suppliers differ in their propensity of experiencing climate-relate shocks, unobserved characteristics are unlikely to be driving our results given the random timing of our shocks.

Any alternative explanation for our results related to endogenous selection would have to systematically explain 22 In contrast, it would be problematic to study the effect of supplier exposure to physical risks on customers in the cross-section, as the exposure of customers to weather shocks through suppliers may be endogenous.

For example, if certain industries systematically depend on specific inputs from suppliers clustered in risky areas, shocks and customer firm performance could be endogenously determined. 16 both changes in supplier climate-shock occurrence and customer firm performance over time, in a way that is not captured by firm-specific seasonality, industry patters, and country-level trends.

A potential concern with our empirical design is the possibility that both supplier and customer could be simultaneously affected by a given shock, either directly, through local infrastructure, or simultaneous demand-side effects. To address this potential threat to the exclusion restriction, we exclude all customers-supplier pairs with customers located within a 500 kilometer radius of the affected supplier from our analysis. Following the literature (e.g.

Kale and Shahrur, 2007; Banerjee et al., 2008; Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016; Campello and Gao, 2017; Cen, Maydew, Zhang, and Zuo, 2017; Phua, Tham, and Wei, 2018), we collapse our supplier-customer panel at the customer-year-quarter level and estimate OLS regressions of the following form at the quarterly frequency: yct = 0 X βt × Wct + µcq(t) + γn(c)t + θd(c)t + δBS2016,t + ϵct (2) t=−3 where yct is either Revenue/Assets or Operating Income/Assets of customer c in period (i.e.

year-quarter) t. Wct is the sum of heat or flood days, respectively, across the locations of all suppliers of customer c in period t. Further, µcq(t) are customer by fiscal-quarter fixed effects, γd(c)t are industry (of customer c) by year-quarter fixed effects, θd(c)t are country (of customer c)-specific quarterly trends. Similar to Equation (1), we add size, age, and profitability by year-quarter fixed effects (δBS2016,t ) to control for different firm profiles.

Robust standard errors are clustered at the customer level. As in Section 3.1, we include 3 lags of W . 3.2.1 Results The results show that both heat (Table 4a) and floods (Table 4b) in the locations of the suppliers negatively affect the financial performance of downstream customers. Specifically, we find that one additional day of heat across all supplier locations decreases customer revenues over assets by 0.0055 percentage points.

Further, one additional day of flooding at supplier locations decreases customer revenues by 0.0229 percentage points.23 Our results are similar for operating income. One additional day of heat and flooding at supplier locations decreases quarterly customer operating income over assets by 0.0007 and 0.004 percentage points, respectively. 23 Similar to Section 3.1, these estimates are obtained by summing over the coefficient estimates for lags t = −4, ..., 0.

17 Compared to the the direct effects shown in Table 3, the indirect effects of climate-shock exposure on customers as documented in Table 4 are considerably smaller in magnitude. For flood days (heat days), the economic magnitude of the indirect effect on customers is equivalent to 31% (13.1%) of the direct effect on the supplier. The magnitude of the indirect effect on operating income is as large as 21% (7%) of the direct effect.

Both, the significantly larger financial cost for customers and the higher relative spillover effect of floods compared to heat are consistent with the idea that floods represent more severe disruptions than heat days, affecting both human and physical capital through direct and indirect channels such as local transportation links, ports, and other infrastructure. [Insert Table 4 here.]

The estimated effects are sizeable in economic terms: one day of supplier flood (heat) exposure decreases revenues over assets of a remote customer by 5.6% (1.3%) relative to the sample average per work day. The percentages translate into substantial absolute values, with a median downstream distortion of 91,000 (22,000) USD in revenue per affected flood (heat) day.

Given standard deviations of flood days (heat days) of 11.5 (16.2) days conditional on occurrence, the downstream effect of a representative shock amounts to indirect costs of over 1 million and 350,000 USD, respectively.

Hence, the observed shocks represent material disruptions for customers – particularly given that both heat days and inundations are projected to increase in frequency and severity.24 The operating income effects are consistently larger than the effects on revenues in percentage terms. This is consistent with the idea that customers are affected by supplier shocks through channels affecting both costs and productivity, as supply chain glitches may require costly shortrun adaptations by customers.

This is broadly in line with the literature on multi-sourcing and endogenous production networks (Du, Lu, and Tao, 2009; Antràs et al., 2017; Gervais, 2018), which highlights the trade-off between input cost minimization and risk diversification. 3.2.2 Robustness To examine the robustness of our result, we use alternative measures of W to estimate Equation (2).

We first replace continuous measures of heat and flood days with indicator variables taking the value of one, if at least one heatwave (i.e. seven consecutive days with temperatures above Given the fact that firms may have adapted their operations in this expectation already, these estimations are likely to represent a lower bound of the ex-ante costs of indirect shocks. 24 18 30° C) or flood occurred across suppliers per customer quarter in Appendix Table A3a.

Second, while our heat measure follows the literature on temperatures and labor productivity (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014; Burke et al., 2015b), concerns might remain that the effect of heat differs across locations depending on the local climate and existing adaptations. Hence, in Appendix Table A3b, we introduce an alternative measure of heat days combining an absolute and relative threshold.

Specifically, for each customer-quarter, we count the number of days on which the temperature exceeded both 30°C and the 95th percentile of historical local temperatures across supplier locations. We also include tests retaining only severe flooding incidents in Appendix Table A3b, as defined by the NOAA. The results in both panels are similar to our main findings.

Next, we verify that our estimates do not exhibit any significant pre-trends to validate the identifying assumption that short-term weather shocks are drawn randomly from the underlying climate distribution. Figure 5 plots the coefficient estimates of βt from Equation (2) for quarters t ∈ [−4, ..., 6]. As shown, the coefficient estimates are insignificant and close to zero before the occurrence of both heatwaves and floods.

While the effect of supplier heatwaves on customer performance materializes with a lag of one quarter and reverts to pre-event levels within one to two quarters, we find an immediate effect of supplier floods that remains large and significant for three to four quarters.

This is consistent with our previous findings in Table 4 and the idea that heatwaves and floods affect firm performance spillovers through different mechanisms.25 Next, we examine if particularly the shocks which are not intense enough to be captured by a disaster database, but projected to become much more frequent due to climate change, are economically relevant. Table A4 shows the estimates of Equation (2) using only weather shocks which are not recorded in the global disaster database EM-DAT.

The results are similar to our main results, indicating that our findings are not solely driven by the very largest shocks. 3.2.3 Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity We next explore cross-sectional differences in the propagation of weather shocks to study the economic mechanisms behind our findings in Section 3.2.

First, all else equal, the effect of supplier climate shocks on customer firm performance should increase with the magnitude of supplier Consistent with Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), both heat and flood shocks have a temporary effect. Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) find a lag of three quarters studying the propagation effect of hurricanes from suppliers to customers, focusing on sales growth instead of operating income. 25 19 disruptions.

Hence, we construct measures of supplier asset tangibility and industry vulnerability as outlined in Section 2.2 to test if the propagation effect is larger for more vulnerable suppliers.26 Second, we only expect to find a propagation effect of heat and floods if suppliers are able to (partially) pass on the related costs downstream, or if customers are unable to mitigate supply-chain disruptions.

To test this idea, we collect the following proxies detailed in Section 2.2: ‘supplier industry competitiveness’ captures the relative supplier bargaining power, ‘industry-level input concentration’, ‘customer inventory’, and ‘supplier diversification’ are proxies for the dependence of the customer on the inputs of a given supplier, and ‘sales correlation’ and ‘relationship length’ capture the depth of integration between a supplier and customer.

We aggregate over the total number of heat and flood days across each customer’s suppliers over the contemporaneous and previous three quarters, and interact this variable with the mean supplier, customer, and firm-pair characteristics listed above.27 Table 5 shows the results.28 [Insert Table 5 here.] We first consider differences in the nature of heat and flood events.

Consistent with the literature, we find a significantly stronger propagation effect of high temperatures for suppliers in the agricultural, mining, and construction sectors in Column (2) of Table 5a. Further, we do not find a significant interaction effect of heat days and supplier asset tangibility.

In contrast, the effect of flood-related supplier disruptions (Table 5b) is concentrated in customers with both high supplier capital intensity (Column 1) and high supplier labor intensity (Column 2), indicating that floods affect both labor and capital productivity. Focusing on input substitutability and customer dependence, we find a statistically significant moderating effect of supplier industry competitiveness on the propagation of both heat and floods.

This finding indicates that customers’ ability to switch suppliers and low supplier bargaining power reduce customer exposure to suppliers’ physical risk.

Similarly, we find that shock propagation is exacerbated when the customer industry relies more heavily on inputs from a single supplier industry, and mitigated for high customer inventory holdings (heat and floods) and supplier The literature has documented that particularly firms with a large proportion of physical assets and labor-intensive (outdoor) activities are sensitive to heat and floods.

27 All cross-sectional characteristics are lagged by one year to address concerns that our explanatory variables themselves are affected by the observed shocks. 28 The dependent variables in Table 5 are scaled by 100 and the results for revenues are shown in Table A5. 26 20 diversification (heat). Last, while the results show that supplier-customer sales correlation increases shock propagation, we find the opposite, mitigating effect for supply-chain pairs with a long relationship length.

3.2.4 Other Outcomes In our next set of tests, shown in Table 6, we further explore the underlying economic channels by examining other customer firm outcomes, including operating margin, supplier diversification, accounts payables, costs of goods sold, and inventory (all scaled by one-year lagged total assets). [Insert Table 6 here.] In line with the idea that heat- and flood-related disruptions may require costly adjustments, e.g.

input sourcing from alternative suppliers, we find a significant negative effect of heat and flood days on customer operating margin in Column (1). For example, a one standard deviation increase in flood days (11.5 days conditional on occurrence) translates into a 2.7% decrease in customer operating margins relative to the sample mean.

Further, in line with the idea that customers are unable to fully replace the inputs purchased from disrupted suppliers, we find a significant negative effect of supplier heat and flood days on the volume of inputs purchased (i.e. customer accounts payables and COGS), and customer inventory in Columns (3) to (5). Last, we find that customers increase their supplier-base, i.e. the number of suppliers scaled by one-year lagged assets, following weather shocks at their existing suppliers.

The effect indicates an increase in supplier base by 0.5% relative to the sample mean for a one-standard deviation increase in supplier flood days. 4 Supply-Chain Adaptation 4.1 Realized and Expected Climate Risk If weather shocks are financially material and change in frequency over time, firms may face incentives to adapt their production networks.

In this section, we lay out conceptually how local trends in the frequency of climate events could affect firms’ decisions to continue or terminate existing supply-chain relationships. Subsequently, we empirically estimate the magnitude of firms’ responses to perceived changes in climate risk based on observable supply-chain adjustments.

21 4.1.1 Conceptual Framework We study the decision P to either continue or terminate existing supply-chain relationships made by N identical customers producing output Q under perfect competition. We assume that the customers’ production follows a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of capital K and labor L to yield a quantity Q, and requires a fixed set of inputs M besides labor and capital.

This set of inputs is sourced from S identical suppliers, which are also subject to production under perfect competition. In this setting, capital investments are fixed in the short-run. This condition is important, as many types of supply chain relationships require substantial, relationship-specific investments (Dass, Kale, and Nanda, 2015; Dasgupta, Zhang, and Zhu, 2020).

Customer managers carefully trade off supplier characteristics and input costs before placing initial orders in order to maximize profits, as profits depend on the quantities qi and prices pi of used inputs i ∈ M . We define heat and flooding days conditional on location and season as shocks W . W in period t is randomly drawn from a normal distribution with possibly time varying mean ωt and standard deviation σt , i.e.

Wt ∼ N (ωt , σt ).29 As in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), W can cause deviations in the availability of one input of production from its first-best level qi∗ to its constrained level qi < qi∗ .30 As documented in the previous section, these constraints can be costly even for shocks of relatively small magnitude. Customers make input decisions and commit to relationship-specific investments before weather shocks are realized.

Therefore, they consider the parameters of the distribution of W before committing to any supplier s ∈ S.31 Inputs sourced by customers and outputs produced by suppliers are determined in equilibrium, yielding the matches of customers to suppliers, the prices pi , and the quantities of inputs qi .

The resulting pairwise matches of customers and suppliers are such that customers would not be willing to accept an increase in the exposure of the supplier to physical climate risks without an adjustment of input prices. As is standard in the literature, we begin by assuming that both suppliers and customers are price takers in product markets. Therefore, we The intuition of our framework also applies if we assume alternative production functions or distributions for W .

Alternatively, Kelly et al. (2005) model production as a function of input choices and an exogenous shocks in a multi-period model. 31 For this purpose, managers may not have access to climate projections, a condition that we discuss more carefully below. However, we assume that there is wide access to information about past weather shocks.

For instance, when choosing a supplier in a flood-prone area, managers may learn about past events from the suppliers’ disclosures, internal information, or local news. Similarly, heatwaves and droughts may be discussed by regional, national, or international news outlets.

29 30 22 focus on customers’ decisions P to terminate existing supplier relationships in a partial equilibrium, and study if customers respond to perceived changes in climate risks.32 We assume that customers estimate the parameters of the distribution of W before entering a new supply-chain relationship. As in Kelly et al.

(2005), they form a prior about the mean of this distribution, ω0 , based on historical information.33 Due to climate change, the parameters of the underlying distribution including ωt may change over time. Since customers cannot directly observe ωt , they assess their suppliers’ shock exposure during the supply-chain relationship every period. They gradually learn about ωt by calculating the average number of realized shocks per year in t since the beginning of the relationship at k = 0, i.e.

W̄t = Pt k=0 t Wk . Assuming that individual customers cannot influence market prices, increases from ω0 to ωt may hence render a previously optimal choice of a supplier sub-optimal. In contrast, when the realized shocks Wt are below or in line with the ex-ante expectation ω0 , customers have no incentive to reassess their choice of supplier.

This intuition allows us to describe the relevant decision for customers as: Pt =    0, if W̄t ≤ ω0   1, if W̄t > ω0 (3) where Pt is the customers’ decision to terminate the supply-chain relationship in year t, W̄t is the average number of realized shocks per year in t since the beginning of the relationship, and ω0 is the expected value of W based on historical information available at k = 0.

To make decisions about the adjustment of supplier networks, firms could use two types of information. First, firms could observe recent climate realizations and base decisions on perceived gradual changes. A large literature in finance and economics has proposed Bayesian updating to model how economic agents infer information about changing environments in general (i.e. Alevy et al., 2007; Chiang et al., 2011).

In the context of climate change, this approach is not without difficulty: In the short- and medium-term, weather outcomes provide a noisy signal of potential changes in the underlying climate distribution. Nevertheless, empirical studies have shown that This choice is motivated by the fact that we cannot observe prices and quantities, and that it is ex-ante unclear if and how firms at large respond to (perceived) changes in supplier exposure.

Beyond the scope of this paper, it is important to better understand effects in the general equilibrium. For instance, the question how increased risk of disruptions affects the value of access to international suppliers provides interesting avenues for future research. 33 While we note that changes in other moments of the climate distribution may also affect supplier-customer matches, we choose to focus on changes in the mean ω.

32 23 individuals exhibit behavior consistent with Bayesian learning, i.e. in terms of efforts to understand changing climate distributions from their own experience (Deryugina, 2013; Moore, 2017; Kelly et al., 2005; Kala, 2019; Choi et al., 2020). Alternatively, firms could use forward-looking models of climate change to assess expected changes, and interpolate expectations for future periods based on current and projected probabilities of weather events (Moore, 2017).

As outlined by Fiedler et al. (2021), in practice this approach is impractical for most businesses: First, while numerous climate projections has been published by the IPCC in recent years, assessing the relative strengths of the various scientific models is challenging. Second, supply-chain managers typically make decisions for the short- and medium-run, and projecting climate change is particularly difficult at these horizons.

Third, business decisions require granular information in spatial terms. However, the usefulness of downscaled regional or global models can be challenging to assess, despite the fact that their output offers numerical precision. Due to these challenges, it appears reasonable to assume that firms at large did not incorporate forward-looking information in their decision making in our sample period from 2003 to 2016. Hence, our empirical tests focus on firms’ responses to experienced risk exposure.

We establish four testable hypotheses. First, under perfect competition, customer-supplier relationships in equilibrium reflect the expected exposure to physical climate risk which customers are willing to accept for a given set of other supplier characteristics and input prices.

Hence, changes in the mean of the distribution may render previously optimal customer-supplier matches sub-optimal: Hypothesis 1 An increase in the number of realized shocks beyond what customers could have expected ex-ante increases the probability that a given supply-chain relationship is terminated. Since we do not observe whether supply-chain relationships were ended by customers or suppliers, our analysis is potentially confounded by supply-side disruptions.

To investigate if the observed termination decisions can be attributed to demand-side effects, we test if the characteristics of the relation of supply-chain terminations and weather shocks are in line with patters of learning on behalf of customers.

Namely, if customers behave consistently with models of Bayesian learning, we would expect that they respond more strongly when the observed deviations are larger in magnitude, or when the signal is repeated over multiple periods over time: 24 Hypothesis 2 The relation of increases in the number of realized weather shocks beyond what customers could have expected ex-ante and the probability for a given supply-chain relationship to end is more pronounced when such deviations are larger in magnitude.

Hypothesis 3 The relation of increases in the number of realized weather shocks beyond what customers could have expected ex-ante and the probability for a given supply-chain relationship to end is more pronounced when such deviations persist over a prolonged period of time. Further, we note that it is unlikely for supply-side mechanisms to be the main driver of the results in our context, as the shocks are geographically concentrated events of limited magnitude.

We also test this assumption explicitly. If supply-side disruptions were driving our results, we would expect that the effect of transitory shocks on supply-chain terminations is of a similar magnitude as the exceedance of ex-ante climate risk expectations:34 Hypothesis 4 Transitory shocks to suppliers increase the probability that a given supply-chain relationship is terminated. Whereas we focus on demand-side adaptation, suppliers may also adapt to increasing frequencies of weather shocks.

As we do not observe such adaptation investments, our results could represent a lower bound due to the fact that customers would not have to switch suppliers if suppliers became more resilient. 4.1.2 Assumptions Before turning to the estimations, we consider two of our main assumptions in detail. First, our framework assumes that both customers and suppliers operate under perfect competition. However, product markets may be concentrated, allowing customers or suppliers to extract rents.

Under imperfect competition, such rents can be represented as a latent variable, λ, which would increase the tolerance of customers to changes in climate risks as follows: The test is similarly subject to the challenge that it is impossible to cleanly disentangle demand- and supply-side driven terminations.

Therefore, we might overestimate the magnitude of the effect of transitory shocks if customers over-respond to salient, transitory shocks despite the fact that those could have been anticipated. Previous studies have documented that firms are prone to availability bias in responding to salient events in related settings.

For example, Dessaint and Matray (2017) find that managers adjust firms’ cash holdings when nearby firms are hit by natural disasters, even if firms have not been directly exposed to these hazards. 34 25 Pt =    0, if W̄t ≤ ω0 + λ   1, if W̄t > ω0 + λ (4) Intuitively, maintaining existing relationships may be optimal for customers with market power even if average realized annual shocks W̄t exceed ex-ante expected shocks ω0 .

Since we cannot directly observe λ, this would lead us to underestimate the effect of an increase in ωt on terminations, as our empirical measure captures only cases in which the historical mean of ω0 but not the actual tolerance of the customer (i.e. ω0 +λ) is exceeded. Further, when suppliers benefit from concentrated input markets, customers may be bound to certain suppliers for a lack of alternatives.

This would similarly increase the tolerance of customers to supplier climate risk and increase the threshold exposure to ω0 + γ. In addition to these considerations, we explicitly test the plausibility of our results using industry and firm characteristics as proxies for λ0 and γ. Second, we have thus far assumed that customers form a point prior of the expected risk exposure of suppliers.

However, customers only observe an approximation of the true distribution at the beginning of the relationship. We think about the resulting additional uncertainty as a band around the mean of ω0 , increasing the threshold to ω0 + δ. The magnitude of δ is unobservable and may vary by customer and supplier. Instead of imposing an arbitrary band around the point prior in our estimations, we therefore note that our measure may capture incidents where W̄t exceeds ω0 but not ω0 + δ.

In this case, our measure indicates an exceedance of the ex-ante expectations which does not lead customers to take action, resulting in a potential source of downward bias for our estimations. 4.1.3 Empirical Strategy To test our hypotheses, we construct a measure to capture if weather shocks have increased beyond customers’ ex-ante expectations, as illustrated in Figure 2. According to our conceptual framework, we assume that customers form a prior ω0 (i.e.

expected weather shocks) based on the historical number of shocks per year at the supplier location before the start of any given supplier-customer relationship.35 Starting at the beginning of the relationship, customers then evaluate their experience and update their beliefs about whether the ex-ante expected exposure is exceeded every year based Since firms’ time horizon for this benchmark period is unclear, we conduct robustness checks with different horizons over five, ten, and fifteen year periods.

35 26 on the average number of observed shocks W̄t (i.e. realized weather shocks). Our main measure, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks)sct , takes the value of one in year t if the average number of realized shocks per year since the beginning of the relationship sc exceeds the corresponding prior for supplier s, and zero otherwise.36 As our outcome variable, we use the end dates of customer-supplier relationships from Factset Revere.

In a panel of active customer-supplier-year observations, we set the indicator variable 1 (End)sct to one in the last year of any reported supply-chain relationship. To address concerns about censoring, we drop all observations from the last year of our sample.

Our identification strategy is similar to the long-differences approach introduced by Burke and Emerick (2016), and relies on the fact that short-run climate realizations, in contrast to long-run changes, are quasi-randomly assigned across locations. Intuitively, our empirical design leverages the idea that managers can incorporate expected levels of climate risk exposure but not deviations from the expectation into their decision making.

Figures 6a and 6b provide supporting evidence for this identifying assumption, by plotting the difference between Realized and Expected Shocks, and the residual variation of this difference after absorbing high dimensional time-varying regional fixed effects.

As shown in Figures 6a and 6b, the distribution is largely unaffected by including the fixed effects, in line with the idea that the underlying short-term trends are quasi-randomly assigned and not determined at the country- and/or year-level.

Based on this reasoning, we estimate the following linear probability model at the annual frequency: 1 (End)sct = β × 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks)sct + γn(s)t + γn(c)t + θd(s)d(c)t + ϵsct (5) To further control for potential confounding effects which may be correlated with both climate trends and other reasons for relationship terminations, we estimate this model with several dimensions of fixed effects.

First, we include both supplier and customer industry-by-year fixed effects, γn(s)t and γn(c)t , to account for industry trends, related for example to trends in make-or-buy choices. Second, we add supplier-country by customer-country by year fixed effects θd(s)d(c)t to account for changes in macroeconomic conditions, trade barriers, or import-related costs.37 We cluster robust standard errors at the relationship level.

To address concerns about a potential violation of In additional tests, we use the continuous difference, i.e. (Realized − Expected Shocks)sct . Since our main variable of interest is differenced at the relationship-level, relationship or firm fixed effects would obscure the economic interpretation of the effect and are hence not included in this specification.

36 37 27 the exclusion restriction, we exclude all firm pairs with customers located within a 500 kilometer radius of the affected supplier to ensure that the observed trends affect suppliers only.38 Hence, for any alternative explanations to be driving our results, unobservable characteristics would have to systematically change in those firm-pairs where realized shocks exceeded expectations, in a way that is unrelated to industry- or country-level trends.

4.1.4 Results Table 7 reports the estimates obtained from Equation (5). Across all specifications, we find that existing suppliers are more likely to be terminated when the realized exposure to days with high temperatures or flooding exceeds customers’ prior expectations, in line with Hypothesis (1). Under the most stringent specification, the coefficients of 1 (Realized > Expected) for both heat and flood days are positive and statistically significant at the 1% level.

The linear probability model estimates presented in Panel 7a indicate a 0.004 to 0.009 (0.010 to 0.015) percentage point increase in the likelihood of supplier termination for heat days (flood days) exceedance of expectations, respectively. Compared to the unconditional sample mean of 0.26, this represents an increase of 3.5 to 5.8%. [Insert Table 7 here.] To facilitate the interpretation of the economic magnitudes of this effect, we also estimate conditional logistic regressions in Panel 7b.

The results show that suppliers’ exposure to flood days increases the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination on average by 7.9 to 11.1%, significant at the 1%-level across all specifications. In comparison, the effect of increases in heat exposure over prior expectations on supplier termination is 6.1 to 7.8%. The difference in the magnitude between floods and heat is in line with the stronger direct and indirect effects of floods compared to heat documented in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.

4.1.5 Learning from Experienced Change So far, we provide evidence that firms are more likely to terminate existing supplier relationships when weather shock experiences exceed expectations. To better understand if firms’ behavior is in line with standard models of Bayesian updating, we test two related predictions. First, if firms use 38 Tests with a 1000 kilometers radius yield very similar results.

28 Bayes rule to learn about potential changes in the climate risk exposure of their suppliers, we would also expect that the likelihood of terminations increases with the length of the periods during which these deviations persist (Moore, 2017), i.e. Hypothesis (2). Second, we should observe that stronger deviations lead to more pronounced effects (Deryugina, 2013), i.e. Hypothesis (3). [Insert Table 8 here.]

In Table 8a, we first estimate changes in the likelihood of supplier termination as a function of the number of years during which realized weather shocks exceed customers’ priors.39 In line with Hypothesis (2), we find that the effect on the likelihood of supplier termination increases when the condition persists for multiple years, and is particularly strong for the second signal.

After two years, a prolonged observation of the deviation continues to increase the probability of supplier termination, but with a decreasing marginal effect.40 Moreover, we test if firms’ responses increase with the magnitude of the signal. We estimate Equation (5) using the continuous measure Realized − Expected Shockssct instead of an indicator variable and present results in Panel 8b.

Consistent with Bayesian learning and Hypothesis (3), we find that the likelihood of supplier terminations increases with the magnitude of the deviation, measured in heat and flood days. 4.1.6 Supply-side Disruptions For clarity of the exposition, we started by describing the observable outcome of supply-chain terminations as a function of customers’ decision making. In reality, the outcome could be driven by both supply- and demand-side dynamics.

If supply-side disruptions caused by transitory heat and flood shocks drive our results, we would expect that the effect of such transitory shocks is of a similar magnitude as the exceedance of ex-ante climate risk expectations. Further, availability bias could influence customers’ decisions about replacing suppliers if firms react to recent, salient events (Dessaint and Matray, 2017). In this case, we would expect the likelihood of supplier termination to increase with recent weather shocks, i.e.

Hypothesis (4). We test this hypothesis by replacing We collapse relationships with more than five signal and impose no functional form on the marginal effect of the first five repetitions of the signal 1 (Realized > Expected). 40 This decrease in effect size is consistent with the idea that some relationships may not be terminated for structural reasons, and hence a high number of repetitions may indicate the resilience of the relationship.

39 29 our measures of climate-risk exceedance in Equation (5) with contemporaneous weather shocks, i.e. Realized Heat Days and Realized F lood Days, as our main independent variables. [Insert Table 9 here.] Our results, presented in Table 9, show a statistically significant, positive effect of contemporary heat and flood events on supply-chain termination in columns (1) and (5). However, compared to the effect of climate-risk exceedance, i.e.

Realized − Expected heat and flood days in Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8), the effect is economically small. For example, the coefficient estimate of Realized − Expected Heat Days (significant at the 1% level) is about seven times larger than the corresponding coefficient for Realized Heat Days (significant at the 10% level). Tests for differences in coefficients between contemporary shocks to climate-risk exceedance are statistically significant across all specifications.

This finding further supports our interpretation that supply-chain relationships are not primarily terminated because of (temporary) disruptions of supplier operations and input availability, but due to changes in customers’ perceptions of climate-change related risks. To further address concerns about supply-side terminations, we also test if the effects are driven by suppliers which cease operations following a weather shock.

The findings, presented in Appendix Table A7a, remain similar when we exclude suppliers which were delisted within two years of the relationship end date from the sample. 4.1.7 Robustness We conduct several robustness tests. First, our main test uses a ten-year benchmark period before the start of any given relationship to estimate customers’ priors. To test the sensitivity of our results to this choice, we estimate Equation (5) using alternative benchmark periods of 5 and 15 years.

As shown in Appendix Table A6, all estimates remain similar in magnitude and statistical significance. Second, we set our main independent variable to zero in the first year of the supply chain relationship. Since we estimate priors as the expected exposure prior to the start of the relationship, there is a 50% chance of exceeding this prior in the first relationship year. Hence, the first signal might not be particularly informative to managers.

In line with this idea, our results increase in magnitude when we set the first year to zero in Appendix Table A7b. 30 Third, 6.37% of supply-chains in our sample are terminated, but eventually re-established at some point. As Appendix Table A7c shows, our results are unaffected when excluding these observations. Fourth, we consider the duration of supplier-customer relationships as an alternative measure of supply-chain stability, as in Fee, Hadlock, and Thomas (2006) and Phua et al. (2018).

In this test, the dependent variable is the number of years from the beginning to the end of a given supplier-customer relationship. We drop relationships that were terminated and subsequently restarted at some point in our sample, and code observations that are active in the last year of our sample as right censored, following the literature. The main independent variable is defined as max [1(Realized > Expected Shocks)] within each supplier-customer relationship.

Instead of including fixed effects as in our OLS estimations, we stratify regressions with the first year of each relationship (FY), customer- and supplier-by-industry-by-FY and supplier-country-by-FY. Appendix Table A8 shows Cox proportional hazard model estimates of the effect of increases in supplier climate-risk exposure on relationship duration.

In line with the previously presented results, the estimates indicate that relationship duration decreases by 0.23 to 0.46 years (0.32 to 0.4 years) when the realized number of days affected by heat (floods) exceeds expectations. 4.1.8 Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity To test the plausibility of our main result, we explore the effect of cross-sectional differences at the supplier, customer, and relationship level.

In particular, we interact our main variable of interest in Equation (5) with proxies of supplier-industry competitiveness, customer input dependence, and supply-chain integration to study the role of these characteristics for the effect of climate-risk exceedance on supplier termination. Table 10 reports the results. [Insert Table 10 here.]

If our findings are driven by customers who substitute potentially risky suppliers, we would expect to find a stronger effect when competition in the supplier industry is high, i.e. when γ in our conceptual framework is small. Similar to Table 5, we use the number of firms in the SIC 2-digit supplier industry as a proxy for the number of potential replacement suppliers and find results consistent with this conjecture.

As shown in Column (1) of Table 10, a one-standard deviation increase in supplier-industry competitiveness more than doubles the effect of climate-risk exceedance 31 on supplier-termination, relative to the average effect ([0.006 + 0.009 × 0.807]/0.006 = 2.2), for flood days. Consistent with this result we find a negative, albeit statistically imprecise, effect of industry-input concentration, i.e. customers who procure a larger proportion of their total inputs from one industry in Column (2).

We next study the role of relationship length and sales correlation on the effect of shock exceedance on supplier termination. Focusing on floods, we find negative coefficient estimates (significant at the 1% level) for the interaction terms of both relationship length and suppliercustomer sales correlation with flood related ‘climate-risk exceedance’. We find qualitatively similar results, albeit statistically insignificant estimates for sales correlation, when considering heat.

This finding is in line with the notion that relationship-specific investments increase switching costs of customers. As supply-chains become more closely integrated, the cost of terminating existing relationships increases and hence modulates customers’ reactions to experienced weather shocks in excess of expectation. 4.2 Experienced Heat Days and Temperature Projections Our previous tests indicate that firms form expectations about climate risks based on backwardlooking historical information.

However, this approach is not without difficulty as weather outcomes provide a noisy signal of persistent changes. As the plots illustrating the identifying variation in Figures 6a and 6b show, the perceived changes in exposure are not necessarily representative of trends in the mean of local distributions of weather shocks.

To investigate possible limitations of firms’ learning processes based on experienced change, we examine how firms respond when experienced changes differ from future projections. To do so, we focus on cases where the change in local heat days until mid-century is projected to be close to zero. If projections indicate minimal change in local climate going forward, relationshipspecific investments to adopt new suppliers in response to short-term trends may be undesirable.

We again implement Equation (5), but estimate the regression model for subsamples in which there is little projected change in long-term temperatures according to the RCP 2.6 (column 1), RCP 4.5 (column 2), and RCP 8.5 (column 3) scenarios. Specifically, we focus on observations for which the projected difference in number of heat days comparing the periods 2006–2019 and 2049–2060 is smaller than 7 days per year under the respective scenario.

The three scenarios represent three of 32 the main trajectories adopted by the IPCC, with the RCP 2.6 representing a very stringent scenario with strong policy intervention. RCP 8.5 is closest to a business as usual scenario, assuming very limited policy interventions directed at emissions reduction. [Insert Table 11 here.] Table 11 presents the results for these estimations.

Panel 11a shows the results when we estimate priors over a 10 year period before the start of each relationship, Panel 11b uses a 15 year formation period. Across all climate scenarios and specifications, we find that the magnitude of responses to deviations of expected and experienced climate risk are indistinguishable from our main results in Section 7.

One possible interpretation of this result is that firms respond to experienced changes regardless of whether these changes are indicative of projected trends. As Moore (2017) points out, adaptation will only occur at the speed at which economic agents learn about climate change. If investments are based on perceived short-term changes, adaptation may insufficiently reflect long-term projections and progress slower than necessary.

5 Climate Risk Exposure and Supplier Replacement In the last part of our analysis, we examine how climate risk exposure affects replacement choices and the selection of new suppliers. This helps us address two questions raised by our previous analyses: First, do firms deliberately manage climate risk factors?

If customers observe the adverse financial effects of indirect weather shocks, but are agnostic about the underlying driver, we would not expect to see permanent decreases in the risk exposure of ‘new’ (i.e. replacement) compared to ‘old’ (i.e. terminated) suppliers. Second, how do firms assess noisy climate signals obtained from short-run climate realizations? We generally assume that customers evaluate existing suppliers and potential replacements during the initial supplier-relationship.

Hence, if firms primarily respond to experienced shocks, but do not take into account that these signals are noisy in the short-run, replacement suppliers may have experienced more favorable conditions during the initial supplier-relationship despite having a similar underlying climate distribution as the ‘old’ suppliers. To address these questions, we limit our dataset to supplier-customer links with a known end 33 date.

For each supplier whose relationship with a customer ends throughout our sample period (i.e. ‘replaced’ supplier), we identify likely ‘replacement’ suppliers who enter a new supply-chain relationship with the same customer in the following year. We require replacement candidates to have the same 4-digit SIC code as the ‘old’ supplier.

As before, we drop customer-supplier pairs located in the same geographic region, and exclude customers and suppliers in the financial industry and firms with a concentration of facilities around the headquarters below 10%. After applying these filters, we identify replacement suppliers for 16,900 customer-supplier pairs in our sample.

As illustrated in Figure 3, we first compare the climate exposure of the replaced suppliers to the exposure that their replacements would have had during the ‘initial’ relationship. Second, we compare ‘new’ and ‘old’ suppliers over the time period after the initial (i.e. during the new) supplier relationship.

For each comparison, we estimate the following linear probability model to study the effect of increases in climate-risk exposure on the selection of new suppliers: 1(Exposure N ew < Old)sc = β × 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks)st + γn(s)t + γn(c)t + θd(s)t + θd(c)t + ϵsc (6) where 1(Exposure N ew < Old)sc takes the value of one if the ‘new’ supplier has a lower climate risk exposure than the ‘old’ supplier, and zero otherwise.

1(Realized > Expected Shocks)st indicates the exceedance of climate risk expectations at the location of supplier s in the last relationship year t before termination to identify supplier which were more likely to be terminated due to climate risk reasons. We include industry- and country-by-year fixed effects (γnt , θct ) for suppliers s and customers c. Table 12 summarizes the results. [Insert Table 12 here.]

We find a strong positive effect of climate risk exceedance on the likelihood that replacement suppliers had a lower ex-post exposure to heat shocks than terminated suppliers during the initial relationship, as shown in Columns (1) and (2) of Panel 12a and Panel 12b. The likelihood that new suppliers had a lower heat exposure than old suppliers is 12.1 percentage points higher for suppliers that were more likely terminated due to climate risk (i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) = 1).

This finding is consistent with the idea that customers choose replacement suppliers which exhibited lower climate exposure in the past when the perceived climate-risk has changed in the location of 34 the ‘old’ supplier.

At the same time, even if customers disregard climate risks and on average switch to replacement suppliers in ex-ante similar climate zones, we might find a difference in climate exposure during the initial relationship, as the ‘old’ supplier by construction experienced a high number of shocks drawn randomly from the underlying distribution.

However, we would expect no difference in climate exposure between ‘old’ and ‘new’ suppliers after the initial relationship, as both firms in this case would have similar ex-ante climate expectations. Importantly, we find that a large proportion of the documented effect remains when we consider the period after the initial relationship ended.

As shown in Columns (3) and (4) of Panel 12a, we find that ‘new’ suppliers were 6 to 10 percentage points more likely (statistically significant at the 5% and 1% level) to experience a decrease in actual heat shocks compared to ‘old’ suppliers going forward. This result indicates that customers on average choose replacement suppliers with an ex-ante different local climate distribution.

In contrast, these findings are inconsistent with a purely statistical effect, under which ‘old’ and ‘new’ suppliers’ climate realizations revert to the mean after switching suppliers. We further consider long-term heat projections for ‘old’ and ‘new’ suppliers in Columns (5) and (6).41 We find a small, less precisely estimated positive effect of climate-risk exceedance on the difference in heat projections between ‘new’ and ‘old’ suppliers.

Regarding flood risk in Panels 12c and 12d, we find qualitatively similar results. We document a large difference in ex-post flood exposure of ‘new’ and ‘old’ suppliers during the initial relationship, but a smaller, less precisely estimated difference in the period after compared to our results for heat exposure. This result is potentially due to the fact that floods occur less frequently.

Hence, when we consider the period after which the initial supplier was affected by a flood, the substitution of suppliers with firms located in areas with less flood risk may only lead to identifiable decreases in exposure after longer periods of time.

Taken together, our results indicate that climate risk exposure affects not only the termination but also the formation of new supply-chain relationships, as customers switch from suppliers which experienced more weather shocks than expected to replacements in less exposed areas.

This effect is more precisely estimated for heat compared to flood events, and weaker when considering heat We use projections of future heat days between 2040 and 2069 under the RCP 4.5 scenario as modelled by the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology. 41 35 projections from long-term climate models. 6 Conclusion This paper studies if firms adjust their supply-chain networks as a result of perceived changes in their suppliers’ exposure to physical climate risks.

To address this question, we combine granular data on global supply-chain relationships from FactSet Revere with meteorologic records of high temperatures from the ECMWF, spatial information on floods from the DFO, and daily temperature projections from the CMIP5. Our final sample includes 5,628 (8,200) supplier (customer) firms across 92 (74) countries from 2003 to 2017. We document three main insights.

First, we find that the financial performance of suppliers is negatively affected by heat and flooding incidents, and show that the financial consequences of these shocks propagate to customers through existing supply chain links. Second, we show that firms adapt their supply-chain organizations when weather shocks at the locations of their supplier firms become more frequent.

Consistent with models of experience-based Bayesian updating, this effect increases with signal strength and repetition, cannot be explained by transitory shocks, and is stronger for suppliers in competitive industries and weaker for closely integrated supply-chain relationships. Third, we document that customers choose replacement suppliers with lower expected climate risks. Our findings have potentially important implications.

The adaptation efforts of internationally diversified firms could have meaningful consequences for international economic development. As developing countries are likely to experience the most pronounced increases in the frequency of weather shocks, firms in less developed countries might be more likely to be substituted by customers in favor of suppliers in less vulnerable locations. As a result, the outlined effects could further economically weaken the areas most vulnerable to climate change.

Further, our findings could be relevant for estimations of the social cost of carbon, as current estimations do not take indirect negative performance effects of heat and flood events into account. Taken together, our study contributes to the rapidly growing academic literature on the financial economics of climate change, and is among the first studies to provide evidence on how firms adapt to climate change. 36 References Acemoglu, D. and P. D. Azar (2020). Endogenous production networks.

Econometrica 88 (1), 33–82. Addoum, J. M., D. T. Ng, and A. Ortiz-Bobea (2019). Temperature shocks and industry earnings news. Working Paper, Available at SSRN 3480695. Addoum, J. M., D. T. Ng, and A. Ortiz-Bobea (2020). Temperature shocks and establishment sales. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1331–1366. Alevy, J. E., M. S. Haigh, and J. A. List (2007). Information cascades: Evidence from a field experiment with financial market professionals. The Journal of Finance 62 (1), 151–180.

Antràs, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017). The margins of global sourcing: Theory and evidence from us firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2514–64. Auffhammer, M. (2018). Quantifying economic damages from climate change. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4), 33–52. Baldauf, M., L. Garlappi, and C. Yannelis (2020). Does climate change affect real estate prices? Only if you believe in it. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1256–1295. Banerjee, S., S. Dasgupta, and Y. Kim (2008).

Buyer–supplier relationships and the stakeholder theory of capital structure. Journal of Finance 63 (5), 2507–2552. Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks in production networks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1543–1592. Boehm, C. E., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2019). Input linkages and the transmission of shocks: Firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake. The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1), 60–75.

Burke, M. and K. Emerick (2016). Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US agriculture. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3), 106–40. Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015a). Climate and conflict. Annual Review of Economics 7 (1), 577–617. Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015b). Global non-linear effect of temperature on economic production. Nature 527 (7577), 235. Campello, M. and J. Gao (2017). Customer concentration and loan contract terms.

Journal of Financial Economics 123 (1), 108 – 136. Carleton, T. A. and S. M. Hsiang (2016). Social and economic impacts of climate. Science 353 (6304). Carvalho, V. M., M. Nirei, Y. U. Saito, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2021). Supply chain disruptions: Evidence from the great east japan earthquake. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (2), 1255–1321. Cen, L., E. L. Maydew, L. Zhang, and L. Zuo (2017). Customer–supplier relationships and corporate tax avoidance.

Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2), 377–394. Chiang, Y.-M., D. Hirshleifer, Y. Qian, and A. E. Sherman (2011). Do investors learn from experience? evidence from frequent IPO investors. The Review of Financial Studies 24 (5), 1560–1589. Choi, D., Z. Gao, and W. Jiang (2020). Attention to global warming. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1112–1145. Cohen, L. and A. Frazzini (2008). Economic links and predictable returns. Journal of Finance 63 (4), 1977–2011. CRED (2011).

EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED international disaster database. Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters. Université Catholique de Louvain Brussels, Belgium. CSSR (2017). Climate science special report. In D. Wuebbles, D. Fahey, K. Hibbard, D. Dokken, B. Stewart, 37 and T. Maycock (Eds. ), Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I. U.S. Global Change Research Program. Custodio, C., M. A. Ferreira, E. Garcia-Appendini, and A. Lam (2020). Economic costs of climate change. Working Paper.

Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3724940. Dasgupta, S., K. Zhang, and C. Zhu (2020). Do social connections mitigate hold-up and facilitate cooperation? evidence from supply chain relationships. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 1–34. Dass, N., J. R. Kale, and V. Nanda (2015). Trade credit, relationship-specific investment, and product market power. Review of Finance 19 (5), 1867–1923. Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2014). What do we learn from the weather?

The new climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3), 740–98. Deryugina, T. (2013). How do people update? The effects of local weather fluctuations on beliefs about global warming. Climatic change 118 (2), 397–416. Dessaint, O. and A. Matray (2017). Do managers overreact to salient risks? Evidence from hurricane strikes. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (1), 97–121. Du, J., Y. Lu, and Z. Tao (2009). Bi-sourcing in the global economy. Journal of International Economics 77 (2), 215–222.

Fee, C. E., C. J. Hadlock, and S. Thomas (2006). Corporate equity ownership and the governance of product market relationships. The Journal of Finance 61 (3), 1217–1251. Fiedler, T., A. J. Pitman, K. Mackenzie, N. Wood, C. Jakob, and S. E. Perkins-Kirkpatrick (2021). Business risk and the emergence of climate analytics. Nature Climate Change 11 (2), 87–94. Gervais, A. (2018). Uncertainty, risk aversion and international trade. Journal of International Economics 115, 145–158.

Ginglinger, E. and Q. Moreau (2019). Climate risk and capital structure. Working Paper, Université Paris-Dauphine. Graff-Zivin, J., S. M. Hsiang, and M. Neidell (2018). Temperature and human capital in the short and long run. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 5 (1), 77–105. Graff-Zivin, J. and M. Neidell (2014). Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for climate change. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1), 1–26. Hersbach, H. (2016).

The ERA5 atmospheric reanalysis. AGUFM 2016, NG33D–01. Hertzel, M. G., Z. Li, M. S. Officer, and K. J. Rodgers (2008). Inter-firm linkages and the wealth effects of financial distress along the supply chain. Journal of Financial Economics 87 (2), 374–387. Hong, H., F. W. Li, and J. Xu (2019). Climate risks and market efficiency. Journal of Econometrics 208 (1), 265 – 281. Special Issue on Financial Engineering and Risk Management. Hurrell, J., M. Visbeck, and P. Pirani (2011).

Wcrp coupled model intercomparison project-phase 5-CMIP5. Clivar Exchanges 16 (56). Ilhan, E., P. Krueger, Z. Sautner, and L. T. Starks (2020). Climate risk disclosure and institutional investors. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 19-66, ECGI – Finance Working Paper No. 661/2020. Kala, N. (2019). Learning, adaptation, and climate uncertainty: Evidence from Indian agriculture. MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research Working Paper 23. Kale, J. R. and H. Shahrur (2007).

Corporate capital structure and the characteristics of suppliers and customers. Journal of Financial Economics 83 (2), 321 – 365. Kelly, D. L., C. D. Kolstad, and G. T. Mitchell (2005). Adjustment costs from environmental change. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 50 (3), 468–495. Kolstad, C. D. and F. C. Moore (2020). Estimating the economic impacts of climate change using weather 38 observations. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 14 (1), 1–24.

Krueger, P., Z. Sautner, and L. T. Starks (2020). The importance of climate risks for institutional investors. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (3), 1067–1111. Kumar, A., W. Xin, and C. Zhang (2019). Climate sensitivity and predictable returns. Working Paper, Available at SSRN 3331872. Lesk, C., P. Rowhani, and N. Ramankutty (2016). Influence of extreme weather disasters on global crop production. Nature 529 (7584), 84. Li, F. W., Y. Lin, Z. Jin, and Z. Zhang (2020). Do firms adapt to climate change?

Evidence from establishment-level data. Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3573260. Li, Q., H. Shan, Y. Tang, and V. Yao (2020). Corporate climate risk: Measurements and responses. Working Paper. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3508497. Lim, K. (2018). Endogenous production networks and the business cycle. Working Paper. Lin, C., T. Schmid, and M. S. Weisbach (2020). Climate change and corporate investments: Evidence from planned power plants.

Fisher College of Business Working Paper No. 2019-03-026. Mishra, A. K. and V. P. Singh (2010). A review of drought concepts. Journal of Hydrology 391 (1-2), 202–216. Moore, F. C. (2017). Learning, adaptation, and weather in a changing climate. Climate Change Economics 8 (04), 1750010. Noy, I. (2009). The macroeconomic consequences of disasters. Journal of Development Economics 88 (2), 221–231. Oberfield, E. (2018). A theory of input–output architecture. Econometrica 86 (2), 559–589.

Pankratz, N., R. Bauer, and J. Derwall (2019). Climate change, firm performance, and investor surprises. Working Paper, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA). Pechan, A. and K. Eisenack (2014). The impact of heat waves on electricity spot markets. Energy Economics 43, 63–71. Phua, K., T. M. Tham, and C. Wei (2018). Are overconfident CEOs better leaders? Evidence from stakeholder commitments. Journal of Financial Economics 127 (3), 519–545. PWC (2015). CEO pulse on climate change.

Available at: http://download.pwc.com/gx/ceo-pulse/ climatechange/index.htm. Schlenker, W. and C. A. Taylor (2019). Market expectations about climate change. Working Paper 25554, National Bureau of Economic Research. Sepannen, O., W. Fisk, and Q. H. Lei (2006). Effect of temperature on task performance in office environment. Working Paper, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Somanathan, E., R. Somanathan, A. Sudarshan, and M. Tewari (2015).

The impact of temperature on productivity and labor supply: Evidence from Indian manufacturing. Working Paper. Strömberg, D. (2007). Natural disasters, economic development, and humanitarian aid. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 199–222. Taylor, K. E., R. J. Stouffer, and G. A. Meehl (2012). An overview of CMIP5 and the experiment design. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93 (4), 485–498. Xiang, J., P. Bi, D. Pisaniello, and A. Hansen (2014).

Health impacts of workplace heat exposure: an epidemiological review. Industrial Health 52 (2), 91–101. Zhang, P., O. Deschenes, K. Meng, and J. Zhang (2018). Temperature effects on productivity and factor reallocation: Evidence from a half million chinese manufacturing plants. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 88, 1–17.

39 Tables and Figures Figure 1: Geographic Distribution of Customers and Suppliers (a) Distribution of Customers (b) Distribution of Suppliers This figure shows the geographical distribution of the customers and suppliers in our sample. Supplychain relationships and firm locations are obtained from FactSet Revere and FactSet Fundamentals, respectively. The corresponding Table 1 reports the number of customers by geographic regions.

40 Verbal Description This figure shows two maps of the world to illustrate the geographical distribution of the customers and suppliers the sample. Panel (a) shows a map with the country boundaries and red dots marking the location of supplier headquarters. Panel (b) shows the same map with blue dots marking the location of customer locations. Supply-chain relationships and firm locations are obtained from FactSet Revere and FactSet Fundamentals, respectively.

The sample is global and both suppliers and customers are distributed over a large number of countries, with stronger concentration in the Eastern United States, along the West Coast of the Unites States, in Northern and Western Europe, in East Asia, and Japan. The corresponding Table 1 reports the exact number of suppliers and customers by geographic regions. 41 Figure 2: Variable Construction — Expected vs.

Realized Climate Risk Number of Weather Shocks per Year Expected Exposure Realized Exposure 3 2 1 t -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 weather shocks/year = 1 2 3 4 5 weather shocks/year > 1 Start Supply-Chain Relationship This figure illustrates the construction of our main measure capturing the discrepancy between realized and expected climate risk based on the exposure of a hypothetical supplier to heat and flood days over time, i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t).

This indicator variable is constructed by first estimating the historical prior as the average number of weather shocks per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of five years before the establishment of a given supplier-customer relationship. In robustness tests we use alternative estimation horizons of seven, ten, and fifteen years.

1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) then takes the value of one in a given year t, if the difference between the realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of shocks, and zero otherwise. For example, in the case illustrated above, the average number of weather shocks over the five-year benchmark period before the beginning of the supply-chain relationship is one, i.e.

climate shocks/year = 1 (illustrated in light blue). In year 1, the realized number of shocks is 1 and hence does not exceed the expected value from the benchmark period. Similarly, in year 3 the number of shocks is 2, bringing the average number of annual shocks since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship to 1 (i.e. (1 + 0 + 2)/3 = 1), which also does not exceed the prior (highlighted in dark blue).

In years 4 and 5, the average number of realized annual shocks increases above 1 and exceeds the expected value from the benchmark period (highlighted in red). 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) would be zero in t = 1 through t = 3, and one in t = 4 and t = 5 in the illustrated example. 42 Verbal Description This figure illustrates an example of the construction of our main measure.

It captures the discrepancy between realized and expected climate risk based on the exposure of a hypothetical supplier to heat and flood days over time, i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t). This indicator variable is constructed by first estimating the historical prior as the average number of weather shocks per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of five years before the establishment of a given supplier-customer relationship.

In robustness tests we use alternative estimation horizons of seven, ten, and fifteen years. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) then takes the value of one in a given year t, if the difference between the realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of shocks, and zero otherwise. In the figure, the y-axis shows the number of weather shocks per year at the location of a hypothetical supplier firm.

The x-axis shows the timeline of a customer relationship for this supplier, starting five years before the supply chain relationship (t=-5) and ending five years into the relationship (t=5). In the example in the figure, the average number of weather shocks over the five-year benchmark period before the beginning of the supply-chain relationship [-5,0] is one on average, i.e.

climate shocks/year = 1 (illustrated in light blue), with 1 shock in t=-5, two shocks in t=-3, and 1 shock in t=-2 and t=-1, respectively. In the benchmark period, the customer-supplier relationship is not active yet, and the customer assesses the average annual exposure of the supplier, Expected Shocks. In the first year of the relationship t=1, the realized number of shocks is 1.

Hence, the expected value of shocks from the benchmark period is not exceeded, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) would be zero in t = 1. There are no shocks in t=2. In t=3, the number of shocks is 2, increasing the average number of annual shocks since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship to 1 (i.e. (1 + 0 + 2)/3 = 1), which also does not exceed the prior (highlighted in dark blue). Therefore, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) would still be zero in t = 3.

In t=4 and t=5, 3 and 4 shocks occur. The average number of annual shocks increases above 1 and now exceeds the expected value from the benchmark period (highlighted in red). 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) switches to 1 in t = 4 and t = 5.

43 Figure 3: Variable Construction – Exposure of Replaced and Replacement Suppliers Number of Weather Shocks, Replaced Supplier 3 2 1 Number of Weather Shocks, Replacment Supplier 3 2 1 1984 ... 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 ... 2017 t estimation period 1984 − 2017 estimation period during Supply-Chain Rel. Start estimation period af ter Supply-Chain Rel.

End This figure illustrates the construction of the comparison of the climate exposure of replaced and replacement suppliers (Table 12) based on an example of a hypothetical replaced supplier and the replacement. We compare the heat and flood days of old and new suppliers based on three time periods. First, we estimate and compare the climate risk exposure of the replaced and replacement supplier based on the years (in dark grey) during which the initial supply-chain relationship was active.

Second, we compare the exposure of both suppliers after the initial supplier has been replaced (in light grey). Third, we compare the exposure of both suppliers according to long-term forecasts from scientific climate change models. 44 Verbal Description This figure illustrates the construction of the comparison of the climate exposure of replaced and replacement suppliers (Table 12) based on an example of a hypothetical replaced supplier and the replacement. The figure has two panels.

In the first panel, the y-axis shows the number of weather shocks (annual heat and flood days) for the replaced supplier. In the second panel, the y-axis shows the number of shocks for the new replacement supplier. The x-axis tracks the timeline of the sample from 1984 to 2017. We compare the heat and flood days of old and new suppliers based on three time periods.

First, we estimate and compare the climate risk exposure of the replaced and replacement supplier based on the years during which the initial, hypothetical supply-chain relationship was active. For the example, we choose a relationship lasting from 2003 to 2007. In both panels, the region of these years is shaded in in dark grey.

The start (t=2003) is labeled ’supply-chain relationship start’, the end (t=2008) is labeled ’supply-chain relationship end’, and the period is named ’estimation period during’. In the first panel of the replaced supplier, the number if shocks is 1 in 2003, 3 in 2005, 1 in 2006, and 2 in 2007. In the second panel of the replacement supplier, the average number of shocks is lower, with one shock occurring in 2003, 2 shocks in 2005, and 1 shock in 2007.

Second, we compare the exposure of both suppliers after the initial supplier has been replaced from 2008 to 2017. The region of shocks in these years is shaded (in light grey). The start(t=2008) is labeled ’supply-chain relationship end’, and the period is named ’estimation period after’. In this period and in the first panel of the replaced supplier, the number if shocks is 1 in 2008, 3 in 2010, 2 in 2011, 1 in 2012, 1 in 2013, and 4 in 2016.

In the second panel of the replacement supplier, the average number of shocks is lower, with one shock occurring in 2012. Third, we compare the exposure of both suppliers during the full sample period from 1984 to 2017, labeled ’estimation period 1984 - 2017’.

45 Figure 4: Direct Effects of Weather Shocks By Firm Geographic Concentration (a) Effect of Heat Days, Supplier Geographic Concentration (b) Effect of Flood Days, Supplier Geographic Concentration This figure shows the effect of heat days and flood days on suppliers’ revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by firm assets lagged by one year with 95% confidence intervals.

The effects are estimated as outlined in Equation 1 for subsamples of the data based on the percentage of firms within 30km of the supplier’s headquarters. The main variable of interest is the sum of days on which heat or flooding occurred during the financial quarters t − 3 to t. The number of firms by concentration is 3,514 (0-25%), 2,412 (25-50%), 1,861 (50-75%), 484 (75-100%). We exclude firms in the financial industry.

All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, controls for country-specific linear trends, and interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) (BS2016). 46 Verbal Description This figure shows the effect of heat days and flood days on suppliers’ revenues and operating income by geographic concentration.

The figure consists of four individual charts. The effect of heat days on revenues over assets is shown in the top left and the effect of heat on operating income over assets is shown in the top right. The effect of floods on revenues is shown in the bottom left and the effect of floods on operating income is shown in the bottom right.

All individual charts show four different estimations for subsamples of the data based on the percentage of firms’ locations obtained from Orbis that lie within 30km of the supplier’s headquarters. The first susample consists of firms with 0-25% of locations concentrated within a 30km radius of the headquarters. The second subsample contains firms with 25-50%, the third contains firms with 50-75%, and the fourth contains firms with 75-100% concentration.

The number of firms by concentration is 3,514 (0-25%), 2,412 (25-50%), 1,861 (50-75%), 484 (75-100%). For each of the four subsamples, the effects are estimated as outlined in Equation 1. The individual charts plot the coefficient of the sum of days on which heat or flooding occurred during the financial quarters t − 3 to t together with 95% confidence intervals. We exclude firms in the financial industry.

All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, controls for country-specific linear trends, and interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) (BS2016).

The charts show the effects on the outcomes, revenues and operating income over assets, on the y-axis, and the coefficients ordered by concentration category along the x-axis. First, on the top left, we find similar coefficients sizes for the first three concentration categories (approximately -0.01 for 0-25%, 25-50%, and 50-75%) and a more negative effect for the most concentrated firms (75-100%) (approximately -0.023).

The effect for the first category is significant, and insignificant for all other categories with the confidence interval just crossing the x-axis. Second, on the top right, the effect of heat days on operating income becomes larger with firm concentration in absolute terms (0-25%: ≈ -0.002, 25-50%: ≈ -0.0025, 50-75%: ≈ -0.0025, 75-100%: ≈ -0.006). All effects are insignificant with the confidence interval just crossing the x-axis.

Third, on the bottom left, the effects of floods on revenues over assets also become more negative with firm concentration (0-25%: ≈ -0.005, 25-50%: ≈ -0.02, 50-75: ≈ -0.03, 75-100: ≈ -0.06). The effects for the three categories with concentrations of 25% and higher are significantly different from zero.

Fourth, on the bottom right, the effects of flood days on operating income become more negative with concentration except for the most concentrated category (0-25%: ≈ 0, 25-50%: ≈ -0.005, 50-75: ≈ -0.009, 75-100: ≈ -0.008). Except for the estimation on the subsample of firms with 0-25% concentration, the coefficients are significantly different from zero.

47 Figure 5: Dynamics Plots – Weather Shocks to Suppliers and Customer Performance .02 Cus OpI (t) .01 0 -.01 -.02 -.03 -4 -3 -2 -1 +0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 +5 +6 Quarter (t) relative to heatwave (a) Customer operating income around supplier heatwaves .02 .01 Cus OpI (t) 0 -.01 -.02 -.03 -.04 -4 -3 -2 -1 +0 +1 +2 +3 +4 Quarter (t) relative to flood (b) Customer operating income around supplier floods This figure shows the effect of heatwaves and floods at the supplier firm locations on customer operating income in the 11 quarters around weather shocks on suppliers.

Specifically, the plots in Fig. 5a and 5b show the coefficient estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for βt from Equation (2) with t ∈ [−4; 6] for heatwaves and floods, respectively. As in Appendix Table A3, we use indicator variables of heatwaves and floods in this figure.

Each model includes customer-by-quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter (SIC 2 digit) fixed effects, country-specific time-trends, and size, age, and profitability by time fixed effects as in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). 48 Verbal Description This figure shows the effect of heatwaves and floods at the supplier firm locations on customer operating income in the 11 quarters around weather shocks on suppliers.

It consists of two parts, first the plot of the effects of heat on operating income in Figure 5a and second the plot of the effects of floods on operating income in Figure 5b. Both subfigures show the coefficient estimates and corresponding 95% confidence intervals for βt from Equation (2) with t ∈ [−4; 6] for heatwaves and floods, respectively. The y-axis plots the effect size, the x-axis shows the coefficients for each of the lags for t ∈ [−4; 6].

As in Appendix Table A3, we use indicator variables of heatwaves and floods in this figure. Each model includes customer-by-quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter (SIC 2 digit) fixed effects, country-specific time-trends, and size, age, and profitability by time fixed effects as in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). In Figure 5a, the effect of heat on operating income is insignificant from zero up until t=0 and in t=3, t=4, and t=6.

In t=1, t=2, and t=3, the effects are negative and significantly different from zero (t=1 ≈ -0.0125, t=2 ≈ -0.01, t=5 ≈ -0.011). In Figure 5b, the effects are insignificant except for t=0 (≈ -0.019), t=1 (≈ -0.025), and t=2 (≈ -0.02).

49 Figure 6: Identifying Variation in Realized vs. Expected Climate Risk (a) Identifying Variation, Realized-Expected Heat Days (b) Identifying Variation, Realized-Expected Flood Days This figure shows the distribution of our main measure of interest, (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t), capturing the discrepancy between realized and expected climate risk both before and during the supply-chain relationship. The construction of the variable is illustrated in Figure 2.

First, we estimate the historical prior as the expected number of heat and flood days per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of ten (in robustness tests seven, ten, and fifteen) years before the establishment of a given supplier-customer relationship. Then we calculate the difference between this prior and the average realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship.

Figure 6a shows the distribution of the absolute deviation of realized and expected exposure to heat (left) as well as the residual after absorbing customer industry-year, supplier industry-year, and customer country-supplier country-year fixed effects (right). Figure 6b presents the corresponding distributions for floods. 50 Verbal Description This figure shows the distribution of the variation underlying our main measure of interest, (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t).

The construction of the variable is illustrated in Figure 2. It shows the difference between the realized heat days and flood days during the relationship and the expected climate shocks before the supply-chain relationship. We estimate the expected number of heat and flood days per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of ten (in robustness tests seven, ten, and fifteen) years before the establishment of a given supplier-customer relationship. It consists of four charts.

In each of the four charts, the y-axis shows the density, the x-axis shows the difference between realized and expected heat or flood days. The top left shows the density for the difference of realized and expected heat days, and the bottom left shows the density for the difference of realized and expected flood days.

The top right shows the density of the residual variation of the difference of realized and expected heat days after absorbing customer industry-year, supplier industry-year, and customer country-supplier country-year fixed effects. The bottom right shows the density for the residual of the difference of realized and expected flood days. First, the distribution of realized and expected heat days on the top left is close to symmetric.

It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.14, but somewhat more dense and skewed to the right. The difference in realized and expected days ranges from ≈-20 to ≈30 days per year. Second, the distribution of the residual of realized and expected heat days on the top left is even more symmetric. It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.11, but somewhat more dense left of the center.

It is slightly skewed to the right, with the difference in realized and expected days ranging from ≈-20 to ≈25 days per year. Third, the distribution of realized and expected flood days on the bottom left is close to symmetric. It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.2, but more dense left of the center and skewed to the right. The difference in realized and expected days ranges from ≈-10 to ≈22 days per year.

Fourth, the distribution of the residual of realized and expected flood days on the bottom right is also close to symmetric. It is unimodal and peaks around 0 with a density of ≈0.21. It is more dense left of the center and skewed to the right. The difference in realized and expected days ranges from ≈-10 to ≈17 days per year. 51 Table 1: Sample Composition Notes. This table shows the industry and geographic distribution of customers and suppliers in our sample.

We retain supplier and customer firms from the FactSet Revere universe of supply chain relationships if more than 50% of the supplier’s assets are in their home country and at least one complete record of financial performance data and climate hazard records is available during the period from 2003 to 2017. We drop firms that operate in the financial industry (one-digit SIC code of 6). The number of observations refers to unique firms.

Customers SIC Code Manufacturing (3) Manufacturing (2) Transport/Utilities Retail/Wholesale Services (7) Mining/Construction Services (8) Administration Agriculture Total Suppliers No.

% 2,310 1,500 1,175 1,070 931 807 337 36 34 8,200 28.2 18.3 14.3 13.0 11.4 9.8 4.1 0.4 0.4 100.0 SIC Code Manufacturing (3) Manufacturing (2) Services (7) Transport/Utilities Mining/Construction Retail/Wholesale Services (8) Agriculture Administration Total Customers Asia Americas Europe Oceania Africa Total % 30.1 18.7 14.7 12.3 11.5 7.0 4.9 0.5 0.3 100.0 Suppliers No. % 3,200 2,981 1,666 250 103 8,200 39.0 36.4 20.3 3.0 1.3 100.0 UN Regions (long) No.

1,693 1,054 825 693 646 394 278 26 19 5,628 Asia Americas Europe Oceania Africa Total Customers UN Regions (short) Northern America Eastern Asia Northern Europe Western Europe South-Eastern Asia Western Asia South America Southern Asia Australia and New Zealand Southern Europe Eastern Europe Central America Southern Africa Northern Africa Eastern Africa Central Asia Western Africa Caribbean Middle Africa Total No.

% 2,268 2,185 978 148 49 5,628 40.3 38.8 17.4 2.6 0.9 100.0 UN Regions (long) Suppliers No.

% 2,633 2,140 703 589 496 292 282 267 250 192 182 65 61 27 9 5 5 1 1 8,200 32.1 26.1 8.6 7.2 6.0 3.6 3.4 3.3 3.0 2.3 2.2 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 100.0 UN Regions (short) Northern America Eastern Asia Northern Europe Western Europe South-Eastern Asia South America Western Asia Australia and New Zealand Eastern Europe Southern Europe Southern Asia Central America Southern Africa Northern Africa Eastern Africa Western Africa Central Asia Total 52 No.

% 1,944 1,647 401 332 323 204 192 148 128 117 104 37 34 7 4 4 2 5,628 34.5 29.3 7.1 5.9 5.7 3.6 3.4 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.8 0.7 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 100.0 Table 2: Summary Statistics Notes. This table presents summary statistics of the suppliers (Panel A), customers (Panel B), customer-supplier pairs (Panel C), and weather shocks (Panel D) in our sample. The sample period is 2003 to 2017.

The number of observations refers to unique firm-year-quarters in Panels A, B, and D and pair-year-quarters in Panel C. Data on market capitalization (“MCap”), book value of assets (“Assets”), revenue, operating income (“Op. Income”), asset tangibility (“Tangibility”), inventory, operating margin, accounts payable (“AccPay”)), and cost of goods sold (“COGS”) are from Worldscope, all measured at the quarterly frequency, and scaled by one-year lagged total assets.

“Tangibility” is the ratio of property, plants, and equipment (PPE) to total assets. “% of locations <30km from HQ” refers to the number of company facilities within 30km of the headquarter as obtained from Orbis. “Industry Competitiveness” is the number of firms (in thousands) per SIC 2-digit industry. “Asset4 ESG Score” is the firm’s ESG score from the Thomson Reuters Asset4 database. “BEA Input-Ind.

Concentration” is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of inputs per industry from the BEA Input-Output matrices. “Supplier Diversification” is the ratio of the number of suppliers to unique supplier SIC 2-digit industries. “Sales Correlation” is the running correlation of supplier and customer sales over the previous 9 quarters. The number of suppliers and percentage of sales (COGS) are from Factset Revere.

“Heatwave 30°C/7 (0/1)” indicates the occurrence of a heatwave as seven consecutive days above 30°C. The sample excludes observations with missing records on revenue and/or operating income, missing lagged climate variables, as well as records of firms that operate in the financial industry (SIC 1-digit code of 6). Revenue / Assets (%) Op. Income / Assets (%) % Locations <30km from HQ Asset Tangibility (%) Ind. Vulnerability (%) Ind.

Competitiveness N Mean StDev p25 Median p75 226085 225085 222031 192319 222031 193251 26.884 1.274 29.598 22.291 5.433 1.201 20.141 4.397 24.568 20.564 22.666 0.807 13.125 0.201 7.755 6.544 0.000 0.489 22.392 1.583 22.222 15.404 0.000 1.048 34.926 3.172 50.000 32.117 0.000 1.923 (a) Unique Supplier-Year-Quarter Observations Revenue / Assets (%) Op. Income / Assets (%) BEA Input-Ind. Concentration Inventory / Assets (%) Supplier Diversification Asset4 ESG Score Op. Margin (%) No.

Suppliers / Assets (B. USD) AccPay / Assets (%) COGS / Assets (%) N Mean StDev p25 Median p75 125359 125359 55111 114785 124023 65814 124605 123944 103663 114206 25.757 1.802 0.051 10.688 1.060 50.621 6.645 3.176 10.247 17.564 20.339 3.132 0.101 11.122 0.747 19.509 24.848 6.901 9.239 16.129 11.788 0.472 0.011 1.611 0.500 35.102 2.850 0.407 3.714 6.094 21.137 1.665 0.022 7.937 1.000 50.475 8.260 1.025 7.498 13.199 33.914 3.203 0.054 15.936 1.250 66.083 15.940 2.733 13.738 23.432 (b) Unique Customer-Year-Quarter Observations Sales Correlation (%) Relationship Age (Years) Pct.

Sales Sup (%) Pct.

COGS Cus (%) Sales Sup to Cus (M. USD) MCap Cus / MCap Sup Assets Cus / Assets Sup N Mean StDev p25 Median p75 500046 746432 72651 60828 62647 577941 592222 16.116 2.431 18.571 2.605 265.669 317.660 490.463 44.091 2.820 17.091 7.331 670.965 1110.934 1758.379 -16.700 0.000 10.000 0.105 13.190 2.972 4.556 18.600 1.000 13.900 0.413 51.585 19.372 27.911 51.300 3.000 21.600 1.695 181.905 118.769 175.762 (c) Unique Firm-Pair-Year-Quarter Observations 53 Heat Days 30° C Heat Days (within-location) Heat Days (conditional) Heatwave 30° C/7 (0/1) Heatwaves Count Average Temperature Flood Days Flood Days (conditional) Flood (0/1) Flood Count EMDAT Heat Days EMDAT Heatwave (0/1) EMDAT Flood (0/1) EMDAT Flood Days N Mean StDev p25 Median p75 202439 202439 102526 202439 202439 202439 202439 13113 202439 202439 202439 202439 202439 202439 14.091 -0.000 27.823 0.243 0.503 19.292 0.696 10.738 0.065 0.064 2.060 0.124 0.442 7.345 23.624 16.170 26.830 0.429 1.048 5.591 3.954 11.554 0.246 0.262 7.848 0.329 0.497 13.617 0.000 -8.967 5.000 0.000 0.000 15.016 0.000 4.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.000 -1.128 18.000 0.000 0.000 19.197 0.000 6.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 18.000 3.571 46.000 0.000 0.000 22.325 0.000 12.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 1.000 9.000 (d) Supplier Exposure to Weather Shocks 54 Table 3: Physical Climate Risk and Supplier Firm Performance Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the sample supplier firms on their revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets lagged by one year. Heat Days (t) and F lood Days (t) indicate the number of days on which heat and floods occur during the financial quarter t and the three preceding quarters (t − 3 to t − 1). The number of observations refers to supplier firm year-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017.

We exclude firms in the financial industry as well as firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the company headquarter. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects to control for time invariant firm characteristics and firm-specific seasonal effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, as well as controls for country-specific linear trends.

Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

(a) Heat Heat Days (t) (b) Floods Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) (1) (3) (2) (4) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.016 (0.005) -0.003 (0.005) -0.015∗∗∗ (0.005) -0.011∗∗ (0.005) Yes Yes Yes No -0.015 (0.005) -0.002 (0.005) -0.014∗∗∗ (0.005) -0.011∗∗ (0.005) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.003 (0.001) -0.002∗ (0.001) -0.003∗∗ (0.001) -0.001 (0.001) Yes Yes Yes No -0.003 (0.001) -0.003∗ (0.001) -0.003∗∗ (0.001) -0.001 (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7626 202,438 5,628 0.7668 202,438 5,628 0.6258 202,438 5,628 0.6311 202,438 5,628 Heat Days (t-1) 55 Heat Days (t-2) Heat Days (t-3) ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ Flood Days (t) Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) (1) (3) (2) (4) ∗∗∗ -0.020 (0.007) -0.023∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.023∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.008 (0.008) Yes Yes Yes Yes ∗∗∗ Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.023 (0.007) -0.025∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.024∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.009 (0.007) Yes Yes Yes No ∗∗∗ -0.006 (0.002) -0.006∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.004∗∗ (0.002) -0.003 (0.002) Yes Yes Yes No -0.006∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.006∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.004∗∗ (0.002) -0.003 (0.002) Yes Yes Yes Yes R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7626 202,438 5,628 0.7668 202,438 5,628 0.6258 202,438 5,628 0.6311 202,438 5,628 Flood Days (t-1) Flood Days (t-2) Flood Days (t-3) Table 4: Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the supplier firms on their customers’ revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets lagged by one year. Heat Days (t) and F lood Days (t) indicate the number of days on which heat (in excess of 30 degrees Celsius) and floods occurred during the financial quarter t and the three preceding quarters across all supplier firms of a given customer.

The number of observations refers to customer firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We exclude customer and supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the headquarters, and customer-supplier pairs with headquarters located within 500 kilometers of each other. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, and country-specific linear trends.

Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

(a) Heat (b) Floods Cus Rev (t) (1) Sup Heat Days (t-0) Cus OpI (t) (2) (3) Cus Rev (t) (4) (1) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0012 (0.000) -0.0017∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0009∗∗ (0.000) -0.0010∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0012 (0.000) -0.0019∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0011∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0013∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0002 (0.000) -0.0003∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0001∗ (0.000) -0.0002∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0001 (0.000) -0.0003∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0001∗∗ (0.000) -0.0002∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 123700 .884 123700 .886 123700 .707 123700 .711 Sup Heat Days (t-1) 56 Sup Heat Days (t-2) Sup Heat Days (t-3) ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗ Sup Flood Days (t-0) Cus OpI (t) (2) (3) (4) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0069 (0.001) -0.0056∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0059∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0040∗∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0066 (0.001) -0.0055∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0061∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0047∗∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0014 (0.000) -0.0011∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0013∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0007∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0012∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0010∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0012∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0006∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 123700 .884 123700 .886 123700 .707 123700 .711 Sup Flood Days (t-1) Sup Flood Days (t-2) Sup Flood Days (t-3) ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ Table 5: Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks – Cross Section Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on cross-sectional differences in the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the suppliers on customer performance. The dependent variable in both panels is customer operating income, scaled by one-year lagged assets. For easier readability, all dependent variables are scaled by multiplying with 100.

Heat Days (t, t − 3) (Panel 5a) and F lood Days (t, t − 3) (Panel 5b) measures the total number of heat and flood days at all suppliers of a given customer during the contemporaneous and previous three quarters. The data is organized at the customer-year-quarter level and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We apply similar data filters as in Table 4. “Sup Tangibility” is the ratio of property, plants, and equipment (PPE) to total assets of the supplier.

“Sup Ind Vulnerability” takes the value of one for a given supplier if the firm is in the agriculture, mining, or construction sector (SIC 1-digit of 1, 2, or 3). “Sup Ind. Competitiveness” is the number of firms (in thousands) per SIC 2-digit industry. “Input-Ind. Concentration” is the HHI of inputs per industry from the BEA Input-Output matrices. “Sup Diversification” is the ratio of the number of suppliers to unique supplier SIC 2-digit industries.

“Sales Correlation” is the running correlation of supplier and customer sales over the previous 9 quarters. “Relationship Length” is the time in years since the beginning of the relationship for the current period t. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, for country-specific linear trends.

Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Cus OpI (t) Heat Days (t,t-3) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.0067 (0.012) -0.0005 (0.000) -0.0015 (0.006) -0.0439∗∗∗ (0.008) 0.0000 (0.007) -0.0290∗∗∗ (0.006) -0.0182∗ (0.011) -0.0206∗∗∗ (0.005) -0.0331∗∗∗ (0.006) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp. -0.0012∗∗∗ (0.000) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc. 0.0213∗∗∗ (0.007) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory -0.0569∗∗∗ (0.020) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers. 0.0013∗∗∗ (0.000) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr. 0.0009 (0.005) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Rel.

Length Sup Tangibility Sup-Ind Vuln. 0.1110 (0.137) Sup-Ind Comp. 0.2369∗∗ (0.117) Cus Inventory -7.2028 (4.423) 1.0956∗ (0.597) Sup Divers. Sales Corr. -10.9024∗∗∗ (3.939) Rel.

Length Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE Observations R2 -0.0000 (0.000) -0.0817∗ (0.048) 0.0051∗∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.2317 (1.374) Yes Yes Yes Yes 117039 0.709 123700 0.711 102762 0.714 54188 0.718 114095 0.709 122162 0.711 93025 0.713 123700 0.711 (a) Heat 57 Cus OpI (t) (1) Flood Days (t,t-3) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.0145 (0.055) -0.0040∗∗ (0.002) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp. (2) (3) -0.0262 (0.030) -0.2379∗∗∗ -0.0043∗∗∗ (0.001) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc. (0.060) 0.1385∗∗∗ (0.048) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory (4) (5) -0.0361 (0.045) -0.1815∗∗∗ -0.1513 (0.126) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers. (0.031) 0.0093∗∗∗ (0.002) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr. (6) (7) (8) -0.1034 (0.069) -0.0650∗∗ -0.2289∗∗∗ (0.052) 0.0092 (0.032) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Rel. Length Sup Tangibility Sup-Ind Vuln.

0.0753 (0.131) Sup-Ind Comp. 0.0921 (0.112) Cus Inventory -5.4896 (4.325) 1.2976∗∗ (0.584) Sup Divers. Sales Corr. -12.3944∗∗∗ (3.786) Rel.

Length Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE Observations R2 (0.028) -0.0016∗ (0.001) -0.0668 (0.045) 0.0428∗∗∗ (0.016) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.7714 (1.355) Yes Yes Yes Yes 117039 0.709 123700 0.711 102762 0.713 54188 0.718 114095 0.709 122162 0.710 93025 0.713 123700 0.711 (b) Floods 58 Table 6: Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks – Other Outcomes Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the suppliers on several customer firm-level outcomes. The dependent variables in both Panels 6a and 6b are the customer operating margin, number of suppliers, accounts receivables, cost of goods sold, and inventory in quarter t in columns (1) through (5), respectively, all scaled by one-year lagged total assets. The data is organized at the customer-year-quarter level.

The independent variables capturing the number of heat days and flood days across the suppliers of a given customer in quarters t to t − 3, data filters, as well as fixed effects specifications are similar to Table 4. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. (1) Op. Margin (t) (2) No.

Suppliers (t) (3) AccPay(t) (4) COGS (t) (5) Inventory (t) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0005 (0.000) -0.0010∗ (0.001) -0.0002 (0.001) -0.0007 (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.0003∗∗∗ (0.000) 0.0003∗∗∗ (0.000) 0.0003∗∗∗ (0.000) 0.0005∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0005∗∗ (0.000) -0.0005∗∗ (0.000) -0.0001 (0.000) -0.0001 (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0007∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0014∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0007∗∗ (0.000) -0.0008∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0002 (0.000) -0.0005∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0002 (0.000) -0.0003∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 122947 .745 122070 .912 101949 .887 112582 .913 111637 .936 Sup Heat Days (t-0) Sup Heat Days (t-1) Sup Heat Days (t-2) Sup Heat Days (t-3) (a) Heat Sup Flood Days (t-0) Sup Flood Days (t-1) Sup Flood Days (t-2) Sup Flood Days (t-3) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE Observations R2 (1) Op.

Margin (t) (2) No.

Suppliers (t) (3) AccPay(t) (4) COGS (t) (5) Inventory (t) -0.0034∗ (0.002) -0.0046∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.0032∗ (0.002) -0.0042∗∗ (0.002) Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.0010∗∗∗ (0.000) 0.0010∗∗∗ (0.000) 0.0011∗∗∗ (0.000) 0.0010∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0013∗∗ (0.001) -0.0013∗∗ (0.001) -0.0014∗∗ (0.001) -0.0001 (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0039∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0036∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0043∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0025∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0009∗ (0.001) -0.0014∗∗ (0.001) -0.0011∗ (0.001) -0.0012∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes 122947 .745 122070 .912 101949 .887 112582 .913 111637 .936 (b) Floods 59 Table 7: Expected vs.

Realized Climate Risk and Relationship Termination Notes. This table presents linear probability model (Panel 7a) and logit (Panel 7b) estimates on the effect of 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) on the likelihood of supply-chain relationships to end.

This measure takes a value of one in year t if the difference between the realized number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of heat and flood days, and zero otherwise. The construction is illustrated in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level.

The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from the headquarters, and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests.

The regressions include year fixed effects, supplier and customer-industry-by-year, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

OLS - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (2) (3) Observations R2 (5) (6) 0.014∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes No 0.010∗∗∗ (0.003) No Yes Yes Yes 126205 0.320 126205 0.380 0.004 (0.002) 0.009 (0.002) Yes No No No No Yes Yes No No Yes Yes Yes 0.015∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes No No No 126205 0.313 126205 0.320 126205 0.380 126205 0.314 ∗ ∗∗∗ 1Realized > Expected F loodDays Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE (4) 0.005 (0.002) ∗∗ (a) Linear Probability: Expected > Realized Exposure to Heat or Floods Logit - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (t) 1Realized > Expected F loodDays (t) Year FE Cus Ind-Year-Qtr FE Sup Ind-Year-Qtr FE Cus Country-Sup Country-Year FE Observations (1) (2) (3) 0.050 (0.016) 0.061 (0.017) 0.078 (0.017) Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 106293 102784 ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ (4) (5) (6) No No No Yes 0.087∗∗∗ (0.018) Yes No No No 0.111∗∗∗ (0.018) No Yes Yes No 0.079∗∗∗ (0.019) No No No Yes 106293 106293 102784 106293 ∗∗∗ (b) Logit Regression: Realized − Expected Exposure to Heat or Floods 60 Table 8: Strength of the Signal – Expected vs.

Realized Climate Risk Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the effect of weather shock exceedance, i.e. 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks), on supply-chain relationship termination, taking into account how often realized heat and flood days have exceeded expectations (Panel 8a) as well as the magnitude of the deviation of realization and expectation (Panel 8b). The construction of the measure is shown in Figure 2.

The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level. The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from the headquarters, and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests.

The regressions include supplier and customer-industry-by-year, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays=1 1Realized > Expected HeatDays=2 1Realized > Expected HeatDays=3 1Realized > Expected HeatDays=4 1Realized > Expected HeatDays=5 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) -0.020∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.076∗∗∗ (0.003) 0.051∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.059∗∗∗ (0.006) 0.008∗∗ (0.004) -0.021∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.075∗∗∗ (0.003) 0.049∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.055∗∗∗ (0.006) 0.008∗∗ (0.004) -0.013∗∗∗ (0.003) 0.082∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.057∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.045∗∗∗ (0.006) 0.009∗∗ (0.004) No Yes Yes Yes 0.020∗∗∗ (0.003) 0.041∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.023∗∗∗ (0.005) 0.046∗∗∗ (0.007) -0.001 (0.004) Yes No No No 0.019∗∗∗ (0.003) 0.039∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.022∗∗∗ (0.005) 0.045∗∗∗ (0.007) -0.000 (0.004) No Yes Yes No 0.016∗∗∗ (0.003) 0.042∗∗∗ (0.005) 0.019∗∗∗ (0.005) 0.021∗∗∗ (0.007) -0.001 (0.004) No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 126205 0.319 126205 0.326 126205 0.384 126205 0.314 126205 0.321 126205 0.380 1Realized > Expected F loodDays=1 1Realized > Expected F loodDays=2 1Realized > Expected F loodDays=3 1Realized > Expected F loodDays=4 1Realized > Expected F loodDays=5 Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations R2 (a) Functional Form: Effect of Realized > Expected Exposure on Relationship Termination 61 DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) Realized − Expected HeatDays(t) (2) (3) (0.000) 0.0001 (0.000) 0.0003∗∗ Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 120805 0.312 120805 0.319 0.0003∗∗ (4) (5) (6) No Yes Yes Yes 0.0017∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes No No No 0.0017∗∗∗ (0.000) No Yes Yes No 0.0005∗ (0.000) No Yes Yes Yes 120805 0.381 120805 0.312 120805 0.319 120805 0.381 (0.000) Realized − Expected F loodDays(t) Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctr-Sup Ctr-Year FE Observations R2 (b) Continuous Measure: Expected > Realized Exposure to Heat or Floods 62 Table 9: Transitory Shocks and Relationship Termination Notes.

This table presents linear probability model estimates on the effect of transitory weather shocks on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. Realized Heat Days and Realized F lood Days measure the number of heat and flood days at the supplier locations in a given year. (Realized − Expected Shocks) is the continuous difference between the realized and expected number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship.

The variable construction is illustrated in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level. The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise.

As in previous analyses, customer or supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from the headquarters, and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests. Fixed effects are included as indicated in the table. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level.

z-test indicates the p-value from a z-test, testing the hypothesis that the difference between coefficient estimates in adjacent models (i.e. Columns (1) and (2), (3) and (4), etc.) are zero. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) Realized HeatDays(t) (2) 0.0002 (0.000) ∗ Realized − Expected HeatDays(t) 0.0014∗∗∗ (0.000) (3) 0.0001 (0.000) (4) 0.0007∗∗ (0.000) Realized F loodDays(t) (5) 0.0005∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No 0.0037∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes No 127313 . 0.566 123384 0.000 0.564 123884 . 0.618 119946 0.027 0.616 127313 .

0.566 124424 0.000 0.564 Realized − Expected F loodDays(t) Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctr-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations Z-test R2 (6) 63 (7) -0.0003∗ (0.000) (8) Yes Yes Yes 0.0005 (0.000) Yes Yes Yes 123884 . 0.618 121022 0.076 0.616 Table 10: Expected vs. Realized Climate Risk – Cross-Section Notes. This table shows the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the impact of weather shock exceedance on supply-chain relationship termination.

The measure 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) takes the value of one in year t if the difference between the realized number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of heat and flood days, and zero otherwise. The construction is shown in Figure 2. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level.

The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. Similar to Table 5, “Sup-Ind Competitiveness” is the number of firms (in thousands) per SIC 2-digit industry of the supplier. “Input-Ind. Concentration” is the HHI of inputs per customer industry from the BEA Input-Output matrices.

“Relationship Length” is the time in years since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship for the current period t. “Sales Correlation” is the running correlation of supplier and customer sales over the previous 9 quarters. We apply similar data filters as in Table 7. Each regression includes supplier and customer-industry-by-year fixed effects, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level.

∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) 1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) 0.006 (0.004) 0.006∗ (0.003) ∗ 1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Sup-Ind Comp. 1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Input-Ind Conc. 1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Rel. Length (2) (3) (4) 0.013 (0.004) 0.019 (0.003) 0.013∗∗∗ (0.003) ∗∗∗ -0.003 (0.063) 1 (Realized > Exp. Heat Days) (t) × Sales Corr. Sup-Ind Comp.

-0.157 (0.279) Input-Ind Conc. Rel. Length 0.140 (0.091) Sales Corr. Sup-Ind × Year FE Cus-Ind × Yr FE Cus-Ctry × Sup-Ctry × Yr FE Observations R2 -0.004∗∗∗ (0.001) 0.007∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.005 (0.006) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.007 (0.005) Yes Yes Yes 126140 0.398 50163 0.465 126145 0.399 78844 0.398 (a) Heat, Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity 64 ∗∗∗ DV: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) 1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Sup-Ind Comp. 1 (Realized > Exp.

F lood Days) (t) × Input-Ind Conc. (1) (2) (3) (4) 0.006 (0.004) 0.009∗∗ (0.004) 0.019∗∗∗ (0.005) 0.043∗∗∗ (0.004) 0.002 (0.003) 1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Rel. Length -0.044 (0.073) 1 (Realized > Exp. F lood Days) (t) × Sales Corr. Sup-Ind Comp. -0.154 (0.279) Input-Ind Conc. Rel. Length 0.152∗ (0.086) Sales Corr.

Sup-Ind × Year FE Cus-Ind × Yr FE Cus-Ctry × Sup-Ctry × Yr FE Observations R2 0.008∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.014∗∗ (0.007) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.009∗∗ (0.004) Yes Yes Yes 126140 0.398 50163 0.465 126145 0.400 78844 0.398 (b) Floods, Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity 65 -0.011∗∗∗ (0.001) Table 11: Experienced Exposure, Projections, and Relationship Termination Notes.

This table presents linear probability model estimates on the effect of 1(Realized > Expected Shocks) on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The construction of the measure is illustrated in Figure 2. Estimates are presented separately for the full sample (column 4), as well as subsets of suppliers located in areas which are projected to experience limited change in temperatures.

The projected change is estimated as the difference between the number of days over 30° Celsius from 2006-2019 and 2040-2049. Projections are obtained from the MPI-ESM-LR model, and averaged across all available ensemble members for the RCP 2.6, 4.5, and 8.5 scenario. We exclude observations before the issue of the IPCC 4th assessment report in 2007. In Panel 11a (11b) the expected exposure is estimated over 10 (15) years prior to the relationship.

The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-year level. The dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. As in previous analyses, customer or supplier firms in the financial industry, supplier firms with less than 10% of locations within a radius of 30km from the headquarters, and pairs with less than 500km distance between headquarters’ are excluded from the tests.

The regressions include supplier and customer-industry-by-year fixed effects and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

≈0 RCP2.6 ≈0 RCP4.5 ≈0 RCP8.5 Full Sample (1) (2) (3) (4) Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctr-Sup Ctr-Year FE 0.011∗∗∗ (0.004) Yes Yes Yes 0.012∗∗ (0.005) Yes Yes Yes 0.017∗∗ (0.007) Yes Yes Yes 0.017∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 49932 0.431 33122 0.455 20147 0.471 102975 0.427 1(Realized > Expected HeatDays)(t) (a) Exceeded Expected Exposure and Projections, prior formed over 10-year benchmark period.

≈0 RCP2.6 ≈0 RCP4.5 ≈0 RCP8.5 Full Sample (1) (2) (3) (4) 0.022∗∗∗ 0.021∗∗∗ Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctr-Sup Ctr-Year FE (0.004) Yes Yes Yes 0.014∗∗∗ (0.007) Yes Yes Yes 0.021∗∗∗ (0.003) Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 49932 0.431 33122 0.455 20147 0.471 102975 0.427 1(Realized > Expected HeatDays)(t) (0.005) Yes Yes Yes (b) Exceeded Expected Exposure and Projections, prior formed over 15-year benchmark period. 66 Table 12: Physical Climate Risk and Supplier Substitution Notes.

This table shows the effect of physical climate risk on supplier substitution. We match supplier firms for which the supplier-customer relationship is terminated during the sample period (i.e. old suppliers) with their likely replacements (i.e. new suppliers).

Replacements are identified as firms with identical 4-digit SIC codes, which enter a new supply-chain relationship with the given customer within one year of the previous Panels 12a and 12c show linear probability model estimates on the likelihood that the exposure to weather shocks of new replacement suppliers is lower than the exposure of old replaced suppliers as a function of 1(Realized > Expected Shocks).

The dependent variable takes the value of one if new suppliers are exposed to fewer heat and flood days than old suppliers, during and after the initial supply-chain relationship, respectively. In Columns (5) and (6) of Panel 12a, the dependent variable takes the value of one if there are fewer shocks projected at the location of the new compared to the old supplier. Standard errors are clustered at the relationship level.

∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The figures in Panels 12b and 12d show the corresponding distribution of the difference (continuous measure) in exposure between new and old suppliers, measured during and after the relationship, and according to IPCC projections, respectively. Decrease Dur. Initial Rel. (0/1) Decrease Aft. Initial Rel.

(0/1) Decrease Projected Days (0/1) (1) (2) (3) (4) ∗∗∗ 0.121 (0.023) Yes Yes ∗∗∗ 0.095 (0.026) Yes No ∗∗ 0.057 (0.025) Yes Yes ∗∗ Sup Ind and Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE 0.149 (0.026) Yes No ∗∗∗ 0.053 (0.025) Yes No -0.022 (0.024) Yes Yes Observations R2 16900 0.076 16526 0.232 16900 0.067 16526 0.224 16900 0.055 16526 0.227 1Realized > Expected HeatDays(t) (5) (6) 67 (a) Expected and Actual Decrease in Exposure to Heat (b) Distribution in Heat Exposure: During the Initial Relationship | After the Initial Relationship | IPCC Projections Decrease Dur.

Initial Rel. (0/1) Decrease Aft. Initial Rel.

(0/1) (1) (2) (3) (4) 0.614∗∗∗ 0.073∗∗ Sup Ind and Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE (0.023) Yes No 0.613∗∗∗ (0.029) Yes No 0.008 (0.029) Yes Yes Observations R2 16900 0.403 16526 0.513 16900 0.054 16526 0.246 1 (Realized > Expected F loodDays) (t) (0.020) Yes Yes (c) Expected and Actual Decrease in Exposure to Floods (d) Distribution in Flood Exposure: During the Initial Relationship | After the Initial Relationship 68 Verbal Description Table 12 describes the difference in climate exposure of old and new suppliers after supply-chain relationships are terminated.

It combines two tables and two figures. This description covers the figures in Panel (b) and (d). Figure 12b consists of three charts. Each of the charts plots the distribution of the difference in the number of heat days per year between a replaced supplier and the replacement to learn about the extent to which customers seek replacement suppliers with less exposure to climate shocks.

Moreover, each of the charts overlays the distributions of two subsamples to compare the changes in climate exposure for terminations that (1) may have been related to climate change in red and (2) are less likely to have been affected by considerations about climate-related risks in blue.

We assume that the terminations may be related to suppliers’ climate exposure when the exposure of the supplier to heat days during the supply-chain relationship exceeded what the customer could have expected ex-ante based on historical priors (red distribution).

In contrast, we assume that terminations are less likely to be related to climate change-related concerns when the exposure to heat days was lower than or equal to historical expectations before the start of the supply-chain relationship (blue distribution). The first graph (left) shows the difference in annual heat days per year for old and new suppliers, calculating the average number of heat days per year in the time period of the initial supply-chain relationship.

The second chart (middle) shows the distributions of the difference when we calculate the average heat exposure for the time period starting after the initial relationship ends until the end of the sample period. The third chart (right) shows the distributions of the differences based on future expected number of heat days per year based on IPCC projections (CMIP5 RCP 4.5).

In the left chart of Panel (b), the blue and red distribution of the difference in heat exposure during the initial supply-chain relationship are similar in shape but differ noticeably left of their center. Both distributions are unimodal and centered around 0. However, the red distribution has a density of ≈0.015 at the center, whereas the density at the center of the blue distribution is ≈0.0275. The red distribution is denser left of its center and has a longer and thicker left tail.

The blue distribution is more concentrated right around its center. Right of the center, the red and blue distribution are hard to distinguish. This pattern is consistent with the idea that customers may seek new suppliers with a relatively lower exposure to climate shocks when the terminations are motivated by concerns about climate change. In the middle chart of Panel (b), both distributions also show a similar shape.

Both distributions are centered around zero, with a higher density of the blue distribution (peak in density around 0.025 compared to 0.015 for the red distribution). Again, the red distribution is denser left of its center and has a longer and thicker left tail. Right of the center, the red and blue distribution are hard to distinguish.

Compared to the chart on the left which measures the difference in heat days during the initial relationship, the difference in density left of the center is less pronounced when the difference in annual heat days is calculated after the end of the initial relationship. In the right chart of Panel (b), we compare the distributions for the future expected number of heat days using IPCC projections.

Once again, both distributions are similar in shape with their center close to zero and with a higher density around the peak of the blue distribution (peak in density around 0.0125 compared to 0.01 for the red distribution). The tails are difficult to distinguish, with a slightly higher density of the red distribution right of the center but a longer left tail of the blue distribution.

The corresponding table in Panel (a) shows the statistical significance of the difference of the means of the blue and red distribution for each of the charts. The charts in Panel (d) correspond to Panel (b) but show the distribution of the differences for flood days. The figure consists are two charts.

Since the IPCC projections are specific to temperatures, we only compare the differences in flood days based on observed data during the initial relationship (left) and after the initial relationship is terminated (right). In the left chart, the 69 blue and red distribution are both unimodal but differ in their center, with the blue distribution centered just above and the red distribution centered just below 0.

The blue distribution has a density of ≈0.15 at the center, whereas the density at the center of the red distribution is ≈0.09. The red distribution is denser left of its center and has a thicker left tail. The blue distribution is more concentrated right of its center. In the right chart of Panel (d), both distributions are again unimodal and show the same difference in centers, with the blue distribution peaking just above and the red distribution peaking just below zero.

The difference in density is less noticeable (peak in density around 0.12 for the blue and 0.09 for the red distribution). The red (blue) distribution is slightly denser left (right) of its center. Compared to the left chart which measures the difference in heat days during the initial relationship, the difference of the red and blue distribution is less pronounced in the right chart.

The corresponding table in Panel (c) shows the statistical significance of the difference of the means of the blue and red distribution for both of the charts. 70 A Appendix Table A1: Robustness – Physical Climate Risk and Supplier Firm Performance Notes. This table shows robustness tests analogous to Table 3 on the impact of weather shocks at the location of the supplier firms on their revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), using alternative heat and flood measures.

Both dependent variables are scaled by one-year lagged assets. The main independent variables, Heatw (30/7)(t) and F lood (t), indicate the occurrence of heatwaves (i.e. >= 7 consecutive days with temperatures above 30° Celsius) and floods (indicator variable if the firm is affected by a flood) during the financial quarter as well as the three preceding quarters (t − 3 to t). The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017.

We exclude firms in the financial industry as well as firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the headquarters. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, as well as controls for country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016).

Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) Sup Rev/L.A (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.078 (0.071) -0.226∗∗∗ (0.071) -0.093 (0.070) -0.144∗∗ (0.069) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.038∗ (0.020) -0.044∗∗ (0.020) -0.024 (0.019) -0.047∗∗ (0.021) Yes Yes Yes No -0.037∗ (0.020) -0.047∗∗ (0.020) -0.021 (0.019) -0.049∗∗ (0.021) Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.7667 202,438 5,628 0.6257 202,438 5,628 0.6311 202,438 5,628 (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.009 (0.006) -0.001 (0.006) -0.006 (0.006) -0.002 (0.006) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.003∗∗ (0.002) -0.003 (0.002) -0.002 (0.002) -0.002 (0.002) Yes Yes Yes No -0.004∗∗ (0.002) -0.003∗ (0.002) -0.001 (0.002) -0.002 (0.002) Yes Yes Yes Yes Flood Severity (t) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.012∗∗ (0.006) -0.002 (0.006) -0.008 (0.006) -0.002 (0.005) Yes Yes Yes No Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.067 (0.070) -0.195∗∗∗ (0.071) -0.087 (0.070) -0.113∗ (0.069) Yes Yes Yes No R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7626 202,438 5,628 0.7667 202,438 5,628 0.6257 202,438 5,628 0.6310 202,438 5,628 R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7626 202,438 5,628 Heat Days (30/95) (t) Heat Days (30/95) (t-1) Heat Days (30/95) (t-2) Heat Days (30/95) (t-3) Flood Severity (t-1) Flood Severity (t-2) Flood Severity (t-3) (b) Direct Effects of Floods - Severity (a) Direct Effects of Heat - Severity Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.028 (0.047) -0.019 (0.049) -0.115∗∗ (0.048) -0.003 (0.048) Yes Yes Yes No -0.025 (0.048) -0.013 (0.049) -0.115∗∗ (0.048) 0.004 (0.049) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.029 (0.012) -0.018 (0.014) -0.011 (0.013) 0.001 (0.013) Yes Yes Yes No -0.030 (0.012) -0.018 (0.014) -0.011 (0.013) -0.002 (0.013) Yes Yes Yes Yes Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.149 (0.102) -0.442∗∗∗ (0.103) -0.244∗∗ (0.102) -0.297∗∗∗ (0.101) Yes Yes Yes No R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7626 202,438 5,628 0.7667 202,438 5,628 0.6257 202,438 5,628 0.6310 202,438 5,628 R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7626 202,438 5,628 Count Heatw (30/7) (t) Count Heatw (30/7) (t-1) Count Heatw (30/7) (t-2) Count Heatw (30/7) (t-3) Sup OpI/L.A (t) (4) ∗∗ Count Floods (t) ∗∗ Count Floods (t-1) Count Floods (t-2) Count Floods (t-3) (c) Direct Effects of Heat - Shock (4) -0.135 (0.103) -0.452∗∗∗ (0.104) -0.233∗∗ (0.103) -0.307∗∗∗ (0.102) Yes Yes Yes Yes ∗ -0.050 (0.029) -0.053∗ (0.029) -0.031 (0.028) -0.069∗∗ (0.029) Yes Yes Yes No -0.045 (0.030) -0.055∗ (0.029) -0.024 (0.028) -0.067∗∗ (0.029) Yes Yes Yes Yes 0.7668 202,438 5,628 0.6257 202,438 5,628 0.6310 202,438 5,628 (d) Direct Effects of Floods - Shock 71 Table A2: Robustness – Heterogeneity of Direct Effects of Physical Climate Risk Notes.

This table shows OLS regression estimates on the effects of heat and floods on supplier revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI) by industry. Both dependent variables are scaled by lagged assets. Industry classifications are based on SIC 1-digit codes. The independent variables Heat Days (t) and F lood Days (t) indicate the number of days on which heat and floods occur during the financial quarter as well as the three preceding quarters (t − 3 to t).

The column Joint Test indicates if the effects of heat or flood days on Revenues or Income is significant at or above the 10%-level for a given industry (+ for revenues, /+ for operating income). The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We exclude firms in the financial industry as well as firms with less than 10% of firm locations within 30 kilometers of the headquarters.

All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, and interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE). Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Joint Test Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) (1) (2) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE 0.023∗∗ (0.010) -0.042∗∗∗ (0.014) -0.053∗∗∗ (0.015) -0.031∗∗∗ (0.012) -0.042∗∗ (0.018) -0.023 (0.014) -0.107∗ (0.059) -0.107 (0.071) Yes Yes Yes 0.003 (0.002) -0.006∗∗ (0.003) -0.008∗∗ (0.003) -0.005∗∗ (0.003) -0.005 (0.003) -0.007∗∗ (0.003) -0.019 (0.013) 0.012 (0.030) Yes Yes Yes R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7622 202,438 5,628 0.6248 202,438 5,628 Heat Days 72 Heat Days × Mining/Constr + Heat Days × Services +/+ Heat Days × Manufacturing /+ Heat Days × Wholes/Retail Heat Days × Transport Heat Days × Agriculture Heat Days × Administr /+ Direct Effects of Heat by Industry Joint Test Sup Rev/L.A (t) Sup OpI/L.A (t) (1) (2) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.070∗∗∗ (0.014) 0.059∗∗∗ (0.017) 0.060∗∗∗ (0.021) 0.048∗∗∗ (0.016) 0.062∗∗ (0.029) 0.075∗∗∗ (0.020) -0.116 (0.081) 0.042 (0.118) Yes Yes Yes -0.009∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.001 (0.003) 0.007∗ (0.004) 0.006∗ (0.003) 0.006 (0.004) 0.009∗∗ (0.004) -0.021∗ (0.012) 0.088∗ (0.049) Yes Yes Yes R2 Observations Suppliers 0.7623 202,438 5,628 0.6249 202,438 5,628 Flood Days Flood Days × Mining/Constr /+ Flood Days × Services Flood Days × Manufacturing +/+ Flood Days × Wholes/Retail Flood Days × Transport Flood Days × Agriculture Flood Days × Administr +/+ Direct Effects of Floods by Industry Table A3: Robustness – Downstream Propagation of Weather Shocks Notes.

This table shows OLS regression estimates analogous to Table 4 on the effect of weather shocks at the supplier locations on their customers’ revenues over assets (Rev) and operating income over assets (OpI), using indicator variables for heatwaves and floods. Both dependent variables are scaled by one-year lagged assets.

Sup Heatwaves (t) and Sup F loods (t) are the total number of heatwaves or floods that occurred at the locations of a given customer’s suppliers in quarter t. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-quarter level. In Panel A3a the independent variables represent dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a heatwave (at least seven consecutive days over 30°C) and flood, respectively.

In Panel A3b, Sup Heat Days (30/95) measures the number of days across suppliers in a quarter with local temperatures both above 30°C and above the local 95th percentile. Sup F lood Severity is an indicator variable for the occurrence of a severe flood across supplier locations. We apply similar data filters as in Table 4. All regressions include relationship-by-quarter fixed effects as well as year-by-quarter fixed effects.

In both Panels, Columns (2) and (4) additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Table 4. Standard errors are clustered on the customer level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

(a) Weather Shocks – Indicator Variables Cus Rev (t) Cus OpI (t) Cus Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0693∗∗∗ (0.015) -0.0902∗∗∗ (0.020) -0.0490∗∗∗ (0.015) -0.0442∗∗∗ (0.015) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0704∗∗∗ (0.016) -0.0960∗∗∗ (0.020) -0.0693∗∗∗ (0.016) -0.0567∗∗∗ (0.015) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0142∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0187∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0086∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0087∗∗∗ (0.003) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0110∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0151∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0095∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0082∗∗ (0.003) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 123700 .884 123700 .886 123700 .707 123700 .711 Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-0) Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-1) Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-2) Sup Heatw (30/7) (t-3) Cus OpI (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0799∗∗∗ (0.021) -0.0702∗∗∗ (0.021) -0.0734∗∗∗ (0.020) -0.0616∗∗∗ (0.019) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0712∗∗∗ (0.022) -0.0636∗∗∗ (0.023) -0.0759∗∗∗ (0.020) -0.0552∗∗∗ (0.021) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0192∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0148∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0186∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0113∗∗∗ (0.004) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0145∗∗∗ (0.005) -0.0123∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0163∗∗∗ (0.004) -0.0069∗ (0.004) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 123700 .884 123700 .886 123700 .707 123700 .711 Sup Flood Dummy (t-0) Sup Flood Dummy (t-1) Sup Flood Dummy (t-2) Sup Flood Dummy (t-3) (b) Weather Shocks – Alternative Definitions Cus Rev (t) Cus OpI (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0042∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0043∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0029∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0019∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0043∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0044∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0037∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0028∗∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0008∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0008∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0005∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0004∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0006∗∗ (0.000) -0.0006∗∗ (0.000) -0.0005∗∗ (0.000) -0.0004∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations Customers R2 123700 6299 .884 123700 6299 .886 123700 6299 .707 123700 6299 .711 Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-0) Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-1) Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-2) Sup Heat Days (30/95) (t-3) Cus Rev (t) (2) (3) (4) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0539∗∗∗ (0.013) -0.0489∗∗∗ (0.013) -0.0507∗∗∗ (0.012) -0.0414∗∗∗ (0.012) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0495∗∗∗ (0.013) -0.0458∗∗∗ (0.014) -0.0513∗∗∗ (0.013) -0.0390∗∗∗ (0.013) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0133∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0112∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0128∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0071∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0100∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0093∗∗∗ (0.002) -0.0110∗∗∗ (0.003) -0.0042∗ (0.002) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations Customers R2 123700 6299 .884 123700 6299 .886 123700 6299 .707 123700 6299 .711 Sup Flood Severity (t-0) Sup Flood Severity (t-1) Sup Flood Severity (t-2) Sup Flood Severity (t-3) 73 Cus OpI (t) (1) Table A4: Robustness – Propagation of Weather Shocks over EM-DAT Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of weather shocks at the supplier locations on the financial performance of their customers. Financial performance is measured as revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by one-year lagged assets. The unit of observation is at the customer-quarter level. The sample period is from 2003 to 2017. Heat Days (t) (ex. EM DAT ) and F lood Days (t) (ex.

EM DAT ) are count variables indicating the number of heat and flood days in the supplier’s location in quarter t, in excess of shocks recorded by the EM-DAT international disaster database. We apply similar data filters as in Tables 3 and 4. All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects as well as industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects and country-specific linear trend fixed effects.

Columns (2) and (4) in each panel additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Tables 3 and 4. Standard errors are clustered at the customer-firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Cus Rev (t) (1) Sup Heat Days (t-0) (ex.

EMDAT) Cus OpI (t) (2) (3) Cus Rev (t) (4) (1) Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0011 (0.000) -0.0012∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0012∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0006∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0012 (0.000) -0.0014∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0016∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0009∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0002 (0.000) -0.0002∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0002∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0002∗∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0002 (0.000) -0.0002∗∗ (0.000) -0.0002∗∗∗ (0.000) -0.0002∗∗ (0.000) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 123700 .884 123700 .886 123700 .707 123700 .711 Sup Heat Days (t-1) (ex.

EMDAT) Sup Heat Days (t-2) (ex. EMDAT) Sup Heat Days (t-3) (ex. EMDAT) ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗ Sup Flood Days (t-0) (ex.

EMDAT) Cus OpI (t) (2) (3) (4) 74 Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE -0.0103 (0.005) -0.0092∗ (0.005) -0.0111∗∗ (0.005) -0.0157∗∗∗ (0.005) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0092 (0.005) -0.0093∗ (0.005) -0.0120∗∗ (0.005) -0.0155∗∗∗ (0.005) Yes Yes Yes Yes -0.0032 (0.001) -0.0031∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0032∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0032∗∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes No -0.0028∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0032∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0032∗∗∗ (0.001) -0.0029∗∗∗ (0.001) Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations R2 123700 .884 123700 .886 123700 .707 123700 .711 Sup Flood Days (t-1) (ex.

EMDAT) Sup Flood Days (t-2) (ex. EMDAT) Sup Flood Days (t-3) (ex. EMDAT) ∗ ∗ ∗∗∗ Table A5: Robustness – Downstream Propagation – Cross Section Notes. Analogous to Table 5, this table presents OLS regression estimates on cross-sectional differences in the impact of heat and flooding at the location of the suppliers on customer performance. The dependent variable in both panels is customer revenue (Rev), scaled by one-year lagged assets.

Heat Days (t, t − 3) (Panel A5a) and F lood Days (t, t − 3) (Panel A5b) measures the total number of heat and flood days at all suppliers of a given customer during the contemporaneous and previous three quarters. The data is organized at the customer-year-quarter level and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. All other variables are defined as in Table 5. We apply similar data filters as in Table 5.

All regressions include firm-by-fiscal quarter fixed effects, industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects, and for country-specific linear trends. Columns (2) and (4) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE). Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Cus Rev (t) Heat Days (t,t-3) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.1018∗ (0.060) -0.0013 (0.002) -0.0649∗∗ (0.028) -0.2367∗∗∗ (0.046) -0.0703∗ (0.039) -0.1306∗∗∗ (0.034) -0.2059∗∗∗ (0.051) -0.1247∗∗∗ (0.026) -0.1817∗∗∗ (0.032) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp. -0.0048∗∗∗ (0.001) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc. 0.0810∗∗ (0.038) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory -0.0893 (0.074) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers.

-0.0007 (0.003) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr. 0.0396∗ (0.020) Heat Days (t,t-3) × Rel. Length Sup Tangibility Sup-Ind Vuln. 0.4888 (0.672) Sup-Ind Comp. 0.2961 (0.568) Cus Inventory -4.9306 (19.664) 56.0093∗∗∗ (3.991) Sup Divers. Sales Corr. -77.2286∗∗∗ (18.155) Rel.

Length Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE Observations R2 -0.0005 (0.001) -0.6969∗∗∗ (0.211) 0.0161∗∗ (0.008) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes -9.2461 (5.920) Yes Yes Yes Yes 117039 0.887 123700 0.886 102762 0.886 54188 0.878 114095 0.882 122162 0.887 93025 0.893 123700 0.886 (a) Heat 75 Cus Rev (t) Flood Days (t,t-3) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Tangibility Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Vuln.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.0880 (0.297) -0.0172∗ (0.009) -0.2049 (0.159) -1.3050∗∗∗ (0.295) -0.5523∗∗ (0.233) -0.5444∗∗∗ (0.192) -1.1313∗∗∗ (0.298) -0.4261∗∗∗ (0.131) -1.1484∗∗∗ (0.265) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup-Ind Comp. -0.0218∗∗∗ (0.007) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Input-Ind Conc. 0.7156∗∗∗ (0.276) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Cus Inventory -0.1054 (0.425) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sup Divers. -0.0050 (0.020) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Sales Corr. 0.3128∗∗ (0.137) Flood Days (t,t-3) × Rel.

Length Sup Tangibility Sup-Ind Vuln. 0.3776 (0.646) Sup-Ind Comp. -0.2846 (0.558) Cus Inventory 0.5088 (19.420) 56.1943∗∗∗ (3.921) Sup Divers. Sales Corr. -85.1009∗∗∗ (17.932) Rel.

Length Firm × Fiscal-Qtr FE Ind × Year-Qtr FE Ctry-Linear-Trends BS2016 FE Observations R2 -0.0064 (0.005) -0.6886∗∗∗ (0.203) 0.1873∗∗ (0.084) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes -7.2855 (5.853) Yes Yes Yes Yes 117039 0.887 123700 0.886 102762 0.885 54188 0.878 114095 0.882 122162 0.886 93025 0.892 123700 0.886 (b) Floods 76 Table A6: Robustness: Alternative Estimation Periods, Relationship Termination Notes.

Analogous to Panel 7a of Table 7, this table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact of the exceedance of weather shock expectations on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The sample and variables are constructed similarly as in Table 7.

The main difference to Table 7 is that Panels A6a and A6b use benchmark periods of five and fifteen years before the establishment of a supply-chain relationship to construct our main variables of interest, 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t), as illustrated in Figure 2. We apply similar data filters as in Table 7.

The regressions include relationship fixed effects, year fixed effects, supplier and customer-industry-by-year, as well as supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

OLS - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (1) (2) (3) 0.007 (0.002) 0.006 (0.002) 0.010 (0.002) Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 126205 0.313 126205 0.320 ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ (4) (5) (6) No Yes Yes Yes 0.018∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes No No No 0.017∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes No 0.010∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes Yes 126205 0.380 126205 0.314 126205 0.320 126205 0.380 ∗∗∗ 1Realized > Expected F loodDays Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations R2 (a) Alternative Expected Exposure Estimates, 5 Years Before Relationship OLS - Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 0.010∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.008∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.011∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes Yes 0.011∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes No No No 0.010∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes No 0.007∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 126205 0.313 126205 0.320 126205 0.380 126205 0.313 126205 0.320 126205 0.380 1Realized > Expected F loodDays Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations R2 (b) Alternative Expected Exposure Estimates, 15 Years Before Relationship 77 Table A7: Robustness – Initial Years and Restarts, Relationship Termination Notes.

Analogous to Panel 7a, this table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact of the exceedance of weather shock expectations on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The sample and variables are constructed similarly as in Table 7. In Panel A7a, we exclude supplier firms that were delisted within one year of the end of the supply-chain relationship.

In Panel A7b, we set the independent variable 1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t) to zero in the first year of the relationship. In Panel A7c, we exclude relationships which are only temporarily interrupted. These observations account for 6.37% of the observations in our sample. We apply similar data filters as in Table 7. The regressions include year fixed effects, supplier-industry-by-year, supplier-country-by-year, and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated.

Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (2) (3) 0.004 (0.002) 0.002 (0.002) 0.007 (0.002) Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 120106 0.303 120106 0.311 ∗ (4) (5) (6) No Yes Yes Yes 0.016∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes No No No 0.015∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes No 0.014∗∗∗ (0.003) No Yes Yes Yes 120106 0.374 120106 0.304 120106 0.311 120106 0.374 ∗∗∗ 1Realized > Expected F loodDays Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations R2 (a) Excluding Delisted Suppliers Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 0.065∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.064∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.068∗∗∗ (0.003) No Yes Yes Yes 0.039∗∗∗ (0.003) Yes No No No 0.039∗∗∗ (0.003) No Yes Yes No 0.035∗∗∗ (0.003) No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 126205 0.318 126205 0.325 126205 0.384 126205 0.315 126205 0.322 126205 0.381 1Realized > Expected F loodDays Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations R2 (b) Excluding Signal in the First Year of the Relationship 78 Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) 1Realized > Expected HeatDays (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 0.009∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.007∗∗∗ (0.002) 0.014∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes Yes 0.019∗∗∗ (0.002) Yes No No No 0.018∗∗∗ (0.002) No Yes Yes No 0.013∗∗∗ (0.003) No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No Yes Yes No 117919 0.305 117919 0.312 117919 0.375 117919 0.305 117919 0.312 117919 0.375 1Realized > Expected F loodDays Year FE Sup Ind-Year FE Cus Ind-Year FE Cus Ctry-Sup Ctry-Year FE Observations R2 (c) Excluding Temporarily Interrupted Relationships (6.37% of Sample) 79 Table A8: Robustness – Weather Shocks and Relationship Duration Notes.

This table presents Cox proportional hazard model regression estimates on the impact of realized vs. expected weather shocks on supply-chain relationship duration. The dependent variable is the number of years from the beginning to the end of a given supplier-customer relationship. The start of a supplier-customer relationship is the first year the relationship is documented in the Factset Revere database, the end is the year a relationship is terminated.

We drop relationships that were terminated and subsequently restarted at some point in our sample. Following Fee et al. (2006), if a relationship lasts until the final year of the sample period, we treat the duration of relationship as being right-censored. The main independent variable is defined as max [1 (Realized > Expected Shocks) (t)] for each supplier-customer relationship, i.e.

the maximum of an indicator variable that takes the value of one in year t if the difference between the realized number of heat and flood days per year since the beginning of the supply-chain relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of days, and zero otherwise, across all years t in which the relationship is active. We apply similar data filters as in Table 7. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair level.

Strata for the first year of each relationship (FY), and customer-by-industry-by-FY, supplier-by-industry-by-FY and supplier-country-by-FY are included as indicated. The table reports coefficient estimates, not hazard ratios. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent Variable: Duration of the Relationship (1) 1(Realized > Expected HeatDays)(t) (2) (3) -0.273 (0.021) -0.332 (0.018) -0.464 (0.024) 34945 Yes No No 34455 No Yes No 34455 No Yes Yes ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ 1(Realized > Expected F loodDays)(t) Observations First Year (FY) Cus Ind-FY, Sup Ind-FY Cus Ind-FY, Sup Ind-FY, Sup Ctr-FY 80 (4) (5) (6) -0.318∗∗∗ (0.022) -0.305∗∗∗ (0.018) -0.401∗∗∗ (0.024) 34945 Yes No No 34455 No Yes No 34455 No Yes Yes ∗∗∗

Climate Change and Adaptation in Global Supply-Chain Networks Nora M.C. Pankratz∗ Christoph M. Schiller† First version: March, 2019 This version: December, 2019 Abstract This paper examines how firms adapt to climate-change risks resulting from their supplychain networks.

Combining a large sample of global supplier-customer relationships with granular data on local temperatures and flooding incidents, we first document that the occurrence of climate shocks at affected supplier firms has both a large direct and indirect negative effect on earnings and revenues of suppliers and their customers.

Second, we show that customers are 10% to 20% more likely to terminate existing supplier-relationships when realized climate shocks at the supplier firms exceed ex-ante expected climate shocks. Further, customers subsequently switch to suppliers with lower heatwave and flooding exposure. Our results indicate that climate change affects the formation of global production networks. Keywords: Firm Performance, Climate Change, Climate Adaptation, Supply-Chains.

JEL Codes: Q54; G30; F64; Q51 We thank Jaap Bos, Claudia Custodio (discussant), Jeroen Derwall, Hasan Fallahgoul (discussant), Caroline Flammer, Martin Götz, Adel Guitouni (discussant), Alexander Hillert, Taehyun Kim (discussant), Thomas Mosk, and Jisung Park for many valuable suggestions.

We also thank the participants at the 2020 AEA Annual Meeting, 2019 LBS Summer Finance Symposium, the IWFSAS, GRASFI, EDHEC Finance of Climate Change, and the Paris December Finance conference and seminars at Maastricht University and Goethe Universität Frankfurt for many helpful comments. Moreover, we gratefully acknowledge the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) for providing data from the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT).

Nora Pankratz thanks the French Social Investment Forum (FIR) and the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI), and Christoph Schiller thanks the Canadian Securities Institute (CSI) for financial support. All remaining errors are our own. ∗ University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Luskin School of Public Affairs. Email: npankratz@g.ucla.edu. † Arizona State University (ASU), W.P. Carey School of Business. Email: christoph.schiller@asu.edu.

1 Introduction Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time. The average global surface temperature has increased by 0.85◦ Celsius (1.5◦ F) since the industrial revolution, leading to more frequent extreme weather events such as heatwaves, forest fires, and catastrophic floods, with dramatic effects for society and economic activity (Carleton and Hsiang, 2016). According to the 2017 U.S.

Climate Science Special Report, the cost of extreme climate-related events for the United States alone has exceeded $1.1 trillion since 1980 (CSSR, 2017).1 By the end of the century, temperatures are expected to increase even further by 0.9 to 5.4◦ C (1.6 – 9.7◦ F) (IPCC, 2013).

While the academic literature in finance and economics has provided broad evidence on the adverse effects of climate change, including corporate earnings (Addoum, Ng, and Ortiz-Bobea, 2019), labor productivity (Graff-Zivin, Hsiang, and Neidell, 2018), stock returns (Kumar, Xin, and Zhang, 2019), and capital structure (Ginglinger and Moreau, 2019), much less is known about how firms and market participants can adapt to climate change.

In contrast, managers and investors are increasingly looking for ways to mitigate climate change risks, for example by adapting their operations and investments (Lin, Schmid, and Weisbach, 2018).2 In the age of globalization, most firms operate in extensive global production and supply-chain networks. Supply-chains often move through parts of the world that are most vulnerable to climate impacts.

As a result, adapting to climate change is a complex task, as firms might be indirectly exposed to climate change risks due to their suppliers and customers.3 Indeed, Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) and Seetharam (2018), among others, show that the impact of extreme weather events can propagate through firm-level production networks. Consequently, in a recent survey, over 50% of CEOs mentioned risks posed to their global supply chains by climate change as one of their primary concerns (PWC, 2015).

Hence, the aim of this paper is twofold. First, we investigate if firms are affected by climate change risk due to their global supply-chain network. Specifically, we estimate the firm performance effects of climate change related extreme weather events on supplier firms around the world and the 1 See for example Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014) and Auffhammer (2018) for a summary of the literature on the economic effects of climate change.

2 Krüger, Sautner, and Starks (2018) document that institutional investors consider engagement and risk management strategies to address the financial implications of climate change risks for their portfolio firms. 3 For example, during the 2011 flooding disaster in Thailand, more than 14,500 firms reliant on Thai suppliers experienced business disruptions worldwide (BSR, 2018). 1 propagation of climate-related performance shocks to their corporate customers.

Second, we study how firms adapt their supply-chain organizations in response to climate change risks. In particular, we examine if customers optimize and diversify their supplier network by replacing high-risk with low-risk supplier firms.

We combine detailed global, firm-level supply-chain data from FactSet Revere with geographic location data from FactSet Fundamentals and granular climate data on heatwaves from the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts and floods from the Darthmouth Flood Observatory.

Our supply-chain dataset includes 4,289 (4,568) unique supplier (customer) firms, comprising over 200,000 quarterly supplier-customer observations across 51 countries around the world, over the period from 2003 to 2017.4 We focus on two types of climate change risks – extreme heatwaves and flooding – for the following reasons. First, the literature in physiology and economics has pointed to several direct and indirect channels through which heatwaves can affect firm productivity.

For example, extreme heat reduces human capital (Graff-Zivin et al., 2018), labor provision (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014), and productivity (Zhang, Deschenes, Meng, and Zhang, 2018), with sharp declines typically observed at temperatures over 30◦ C.5 Given current global carbon emissions, the number of heat days (i.e.

days that exceed 100◦ F) is projected to rise dramatically, from currently 1% of days to more than 15% of days by 2099 (Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014), making extreme heatwaves a common and impactful phenomenon in the future. Second, flooding incidents can cause enormous economic damage to the affected region. According to FEMA, the United States suffered more than $260 billion in flood-related damages between 1980 and 2013.

As a result of climate change, both inland and coastal floods are expected to become more frequent and severe in the coming years (CSSR, 2017). While Addoum et al. (2019) and Pankratz, Bauer, and Derwall (2019) show that exposure to local heatwaves affects the profitability of listed firms in many industries, both the question if climate change related shocks propagate along firm-level links and how customer firms can potentially mitigate such risks are unclear.

First, the implications of climate shocks for suppliers and customers might differ. While extreme temperatures and floods might be costly to supplier firms, for example 4 In contrast to previous research on supply-chains in finance, which has mostly relied on data from Compustat Segment Files, this dataset allows us to study the initiation and termination of customer-supplier relationships. See Section 2 for details.

5 High temperatures are also associated with higher civil conflict risk (Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015a) and immigration (Feng, Krüger, and Oppenheimer, 2010), which might indirectly impact firms in the affected areas. 2 by increasing energy consumption for air conditioning or clean-up costs, customer firms would be unaffected by such shocks if suppliers cannot pass on the incurred costs downstream. In this case, neither heat nor flood related shocks would propagate from suppliers to customers.

On the other hand, if heatwaves or floods lead to lower production output, such disruptions could propagate along the supply-chain and affect customer firms, potentially with a delay. Second, if managers understand the risks of climate change, they plausibly organize operations to absorb climate risks and minimize disruptions due to shocks to their suppliers. Again, we would not expect climate shocks to propagate from suppliers to customer in this case.

On the other hand, frictions such as relationship-specific investments or a high degree of input specialization might prevent customer firms from making such adjustments or from switching to alternative suppliers. Further, the risks of climate change have become much more salient over the past decades, as the frequency of extreme weather events and scientific evidence of future risks and public awareness both have increased.

If managers are increasingly considering climate change risks when making operational and investment decisions, we would expect that customers become more likely to switch suppliers when observed climate change risks exceed previous expectations. Our first set of tests focuses on the effect of climate change related weather events on the operating performance of affected supplier firms.

Following the climate science literature (Carleton and Hsiang, 2016), we construct a location specific measure of heatwaves for our sample supplier firms based on the daily temperatures over a given quarter in the location of the firm’s production facilities. Consistent with Addoum et al.

(2019), we document that the occurrence of a heatwave during one of the three previous firm-quarters is associated with a subsequent reduction in revenue (operating income) by 3.9% (9.7%) relative to the sample median. Focusing on flooding incidents, we document a decrease by 3.9% (10.2%) relative to the sample median.

These results hold after controlling for firm-fixed effects, firm-specific seasonal trends, industry-specific time trends, as well as a host of firm- and industry characteristics and trends. Next, we provide evidence that firms are indeed exposed to climate change risks due to their global supply-chain network. Our findings show that climate change related shocks to supplier firms have a negative effect on the performance of their customers.

Following the occurrence of a heatwave in a given firm-quarter at a single supplier, customer revenues decrease by 0.2% relative to the sample median. When suppliers are affected by a local flooding incident, customer revenue 3 and operating income are reduced by 1.8% and 2.2%, respectively. Consistent with Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), these effects hold with a lag of up to four quarters. We conduct a number of robustness tests.

First, we employ counting measures of heatwaves and flood incidents instead of using dummy variables and find similar result. Second, we implement our experiments both at the supplier-customer-quarter observation level as well as in a collapsed sample of customer-quarter-level observations, aggregating across suppliers for each sample customer. The results are similar in both settings.

Third, we implement a placebo test by studying time periods in which our supplier-customer pairs were not yet or no longer in a supply-chain relationship. We find no evidence of climate risk propagation during these placebo periods. Our main tests focus on the adaptation of supply-chains to climate change risks. We first examine how climate change risk affects the likelihood that customers terminate the relationship with their customers.

Assuming that managers trade off potential climate-related risks with other firm characteristics (product quality, costs, delivery times, etc.) when entering a supply-chain relationship, we hypothesize that a customer firm is more likely to terminate an existing supplierrelation when the climate shocks observed over the course of a supply-chain relationship exceed the ex-ante anticipated risks.

We therefore construct a measure of realized vs. expected climate risk by comparing heatwaves and flood incidents after the establishment of a supply-chain link to the observed climate shocks in the years before as a benchmark. We document a large, positive effect of realized vs. expected climate risk on supplier termination.

Our results show that a supply-chain relationship is 1.0 (3.7) percentage points more likely to be terminated in a given year, if the realized number of heatwaves (floods) exceeds the ex-ante expected number. This effect is economically meaningful given the unconditional expectation that a supply-chain relationship ends in any given year of 15.1% in our sample.

The results are robust to using several alternative ways of constructing our climate risk measure, and significant at the 1%-level, controlling for any time-invariant supplier-by-customer characteristics, various time-variant financial supplier and customer characteristics, industry-by-time fixed effects, and country-by-time fixed effects.

Importantly, when we solely consider the occurrence of heatwaves and floods throughout the supply-chain relationship (without comparing it to ex-ante expected climate shocks), we find a much smaller, statistically insignificant impact on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. This is consistent with the notion that managers are taking climate risks 4 into consideration when entering a supply-chain relationship.

Last, we examine how firms optimize their supply-chain climate risk by analyzing if customers switch from high climate-risk to low climate-risk suppliers. For this purpose, we consider all instances of ending supply-chain relationships in our sample and match each ‘dropped’ supplier with the ‘replacement’ suppliers, i.e. firms with the same 4-digit SIC code which newly became suppliers to the same customer within the next two years.

We then compare the realized climate risk of the dropped and replacement suppliers based on the number of heatwaves and flooding incidents over the same time period. We find that replacement suppliers on average have 0.83 fewer heatwaves and 0.03 fewer floods than terminated suppliers, measured over the duration of the relation with the terminated supplier.

The result is statically significant at the 1% level (t-statistics of 17.9 and 4.2), and robust to alternative comparison periods and climate risk measures. Our paper contributes to the literature on the economic effects of climate change along several dimensions. To the best of our knowledge, we present the first evidence of operational adaptation to climate change-risk at the firm level.

Our main result shows that managers respond to climate risks resulting from their supply-chain network by switching from high-risk to low-risk suppliers, indicating that climate risks can drive the formation of global firm-level production networks. This finding has important potential implications. As the climate science literature has shown (e.g.

Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015b and Carleton and Hsiang, 2016), developing countries around the world are more severely affected by the outcomes of global climate change than developed countries in North America and Western Europe.

However, as particularly the largest corporations traded on international stock exchanges rely on extensive, worldwide production networks, it is important for managers and policymakers to be aware of the extent to which the economic implications of climate change are shared through supply chain links.

Moreover, if firms further shift economic activity from ‘southern’ to ‘northern’ countries due to heterogeneity in climate change risk, this effect could contribute to widening global inequality and economically weaken the areas most vulnerable to climate change. Lin et al. (2018) also study climate change adaptation, focusing on the investments of electricity generating firms in more flexible power generation technologies.

This paper also provides novel evidence on the implications of climate change for firms and investors.

Previous research in the finance literature has studied the direct effects of climate shocks on firm profitability (Zhang et al., 2018; Addoum et al., 2019; Pankratz et al., 2019), housing prices 5 (Baldauf, Garlappi, and Yannelis, 2019), stock returns (Kumar et al., 2019), financial markets (Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa, 2016; Hong, Li, and Xu, 2019; Schlenker and Taylor, 2019), and capital structure (Ginglinger and Moreau, 2019).

Our paper is the first to show that firms can be indirectly exposed to climate shocks due to their global supplier network. This aspect of our findings is most closely related to Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), Seetharam (2018), and Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019), who document the propagation of natural disasters along input-output linkages.

The fundamental difference between our study and these papers is that we focus on the effects of temperature exposure and flood incidents, allowing us to assess the potential impact of climate change risk propagation along supply-chain links. 2 Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics To conduct our empirical analysis, we combine data on global supply-chain relationships, firm financial performance, and granular data on local climate exposure from four main sources.

In the following sections we describe the data sources in detail, explain how we link the individual datasets, and provide summary statistics for our main sample. The final sample used for the empirical tests in Sections 3 and 5 varies, as we merge supplier-customer relationship data with different climate change-related databases.

For example, in Section 3 we focus on the propagation of climate shocks along existing supply-chain links, while Section 5 explores the determinants of customers switching suppliers. The following summary statistics therefore refer to our main sample used to examine climate shock propagation in Section 3. For this purpose, we retain each supplier- and customer-quarter in our main sample for which a complete record of supply-chain data, financial information, and climate exposure data is available.

Throughout the rest of the paper, we provide relevant summary statistics and details in the context of the respective empirical tests. 2.1 Global Supply-Chains We start by obtaining information on customer-supplier relationships from the recently available FactSet Revere database. Previous research on supply-chains in finance (e.g.

Hertzel, Li, Officer, and Rodgers, 2008; Cohen and Frazzini, 2008; Banerjee, Dasgupta, and Kim, 2008) has relied primarily on the SEC’s regulation S-K, which requires U.S. firms to disclose the existence and 6 names of customer firms representing at least 10% of their total sales, to identify customer-supplier links. In contrast, the Revere supply-chain data has two important advantages that are particularly important in the context of this paper.

First, while the SEC regulation does not apply in other countries, hence limiting existing research mostly to U.S. firms, Factset Revere supply-chain data includes both U.S. and foreign supplier and customer firms. This is important because many of the regions most vulnerable to climate change around the world are located outside of the United States.

Second, and more importantly, previous research relying on the SEC regulation has been unable to study the initiation and termination of supplier-customer relationships, since the appearance and disappearance of a given supply-chain link in the data might either be due to a customer starting/ending a relationship with a given supplier, or because a customer firm was above/below the 10% reporting threshold in a given year.

In contrast, the Revere supply-chain data is hand-collected, verified, and updated by FactSet analysts relying on a range of primary sources of information, including companies’ annual reports and 10-K filings, investor presentations, company websites and press releases, corporate actions, and 10-Q and 8-K filings.

This is crucial for our analysis of supply-chain formation and climate change adaptation, as it provides us with precise information on the beginning and end of a given supplier-customer relationship. In total, our sample includes 4,568 unique customer firms and 4,289 unique supplier firms across 51 different countries, comprising approximately 220,000 supplier-customer pair-year-quarter observations over the sample period from 2003 to 2017.

The geographical and industry distribution of the suppliers and customers in our sample is summarized in Table 1 and visually illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. As documented in Table 1, most of the suppliers and customers in our sample operate in manufacturing (SIC 1st digits 2 and 3) or transport and utilities (SIC 1st digit 4). Geographically, the majority of suppliers are located in North America (41%), East Asia and Pacific (30.6%) and Europe or Central Asia (18.4%).

The regional distribution of customers is similar to the geographic distribution of the suppliers. Table 2a (Panel C) presents relationship-level summary statistics for the firms in our sample. As documented, the average supply-chain relationship in the sample lasts 13.83 quarters. Similar to previous research on supply-chains in finance (e.g.

Cen, Dasgupta, Elkamhi, and Pungaliya, 2015; Cen, Maydew, Zhang, and Zuo, 2017; Cen, Chen, Hou, and Richardson, 2018), we document an asymmetric mutual importance between customers and their suppliers in our sample. First, 7 sample customer firms are typically much larger than their suppliers. The median sample customer holds 29 times the assets of the median supplier firm (book value of assets).

Second, for firm-pairs where detailed sales data from supplier to customer is available (9.39% of the sample), the average proportion of sales the sample customers represent to their suppliers is 17.87%, while the average proportion of cost-of-goods-sold (COGS) suppliers represent to customers is only 1.82%. This relationship asymmetry suggests that customers on average have higher bargaining power in the relationship with their suppliers.

2.2 Accounting Performance and Firm Characteristics Next, we obtain quarterly financial performance records for the firms in our sample from 2000 to 2017 from Compustat Global.6 Our main variables of interest for measuring operating firm performance in Section 3 are quarterly revenues and operating income, scaled by asset size.

In addition to financial performance data, we obtain information on firms’ financial reporting schedules to ensure that we correctly match climate records and performance records when financial quarters deviate from calendar quarters.

To ensure that international financial records comparable, we convert all variables into U.S. dollars using the WRDS currency conversion tables, and deflate the values using the consumer price index information provided by the International Financial Statistics of the International Monetary Fund. We further collect data on several additional firm characteristics from FactSet as control variables.

These characteristics include firm controls such as the date of the first trade of the firms’ shares to construct a proxy for firm age, the price-to-book ratio as well as the debt-to-assets ratio. To remove outliers, we trim all variables above (below) the 99th (1st) percentile. We further drop firms with incomplete records of financial information and exclude firms in the financial industry (SIC code between 6000 and 6999).

Panels A and B of Table 2a report summary statistics for customer and supplier financial performance and firm characteristics after applying the data filters outlined above. In line with the expectation that suppliers are on average smaller than their customers, the average book value of assets is is 6,354 million USD for customer firms, and 5,097 million USD for suppliers.

6 Compared to our sample of supply-chain relationships from FactSet Revere, we extend the financial performance sample by three years for later placebo tests, see Table 5. 8 Customers (Panel A) and suppliers (Panel B) have similar operating performance in our sample. The average quarterly (median) customer Revenue/Assets is 23.99% (19.91%) for customers and 21.96% (18.77%) for suppliers.

The average quarterly (median) customer Operating Income/Assets is 2.47% (2.57%) for customers and 1.92% (2.31%) for suppliers. 2.3 Firm Locations A crucial requirement for our empirical analysis of the impact of climate shocks on downstream propagation and the formation of supply-chain relationships is identifying the location of our sample firms. In this paper, we obtain information on the location of firms’ operations from the FactSet Fundamentals database.

Specifically, as our primary measure for firm location we use the addresses (City, Zip Code, Street Name) of firm headquarters as obtained from FactSet Fundamentals. Of course, firms’ plants and establishments are not always located in the same location as firms’ headquarters. However, this measurement error is likely to bias our estimates in Sections 3 and 5 against finding any effect of climate shocks on firm performance and supply-chain formation.

In addition, we use FactSet Revere information on firms’ geographical concentration of assets to determine in which locations firms operate. These records are collected based on firms’ public reporting of assets, sales, and income by geographic and product segments. Specifically, publicly listed firms are required to disclose these concentrations for all segments which represent more than 10% of total assets, sales, or income.

In our main analysis, we limit our sample to firms with more than 50% of their assets in their home country to ensure that climate shocks affect a substantial part of firms’ assets and operations. To match firms with the local information on climate hazards, we geocode the addresses of their headquarters using the Bing Maps API. We apply two additional location-based data filters to our main sample: First, we remove decentralized firms with < 50% of assets in their primary geographic segment.

Second, we drop all supplier-customer firm-pairs for which the headquarters of the two firms are located within 500km of each other in the analyses of Section 5, to rule out that both firms are affected simultaneously by the same climate shocks.

As reported in Panel A and B of Table 2a, both customers and suppliers hold a substantially larger share of their assets in their home country than imposed by our 50% threshold: the average asset home-country concentration of customers is 79.4%, and the concentration of suppliers’ assets is 80.5%. 9 2.4 Climate Data In this paper we focus on two types of climate change related shocks – extreme heatwaves and flooding incidents – for the following reasons.

First, heatwaves and floods are regionally concentrated events, allowing us to exploit the high granularity of climate data and the resulting geographic variation in climate exposure across our sample firms in our empirical tests.

Second, climate science research widely agrees that heatwaves and floods are expected to become significantly more frequent and severe in the coming years (CSSR, 2017), making these climate shocks a particularly important subject of study for assessing the future economic costs of climate change. This is different from other type of natural disasters previously studied in the literature, e.g. earthquakes, as their occurrence cannot be unambiguously linked to climate change.

Third, while both extreme heat and floods can cause significant economic damage (see e.g. Graff-Zivin et al., 2018; Graff-Zivin and Neidell, 2014; Zhang et al., 2018), the two types of climate shocks possibly affect firms’ operating performance and the results propagation effects through different channels. This allows us to further study the way climate shocks affect supply-chain formation by comparing similarities and differences between the effects of heatwaves and flooding incidents.

2.4.1 Heatwaves First, we construct indicators capturing the occurrence of heatwaves at the firm-quarter-level from daily, location-specific information on maximum temperatures. The global coverage of weather station-based temperature records varies substantially across time and across different regions around the world.

The resulting data gaps can cause substantial issues for empirical analysis, as weather station coverage can for example be correlated with other economic characteristics of a given region. To alleviate this concern, we use ‘re-analysis’ temperature data7 from the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), which is available at a significantly higher geographical and temporal granularity than the temperature data used in previous research (see e.g. Lin et al., 2018).

Specifically, we use the ERA-Interim reanalysis data set with global, daily coverage of a 0.75 × 0.75° latitude-longitude grid. The data is available starting in 1979.8 7 Re-analysis temperatures are generated by interpolating local temperatures based on data from existing weather stations and a number of other atmospheric data sources based on scientifically established climate models.

8 Dee, Uppala, Simmons, Berrisford, Poli, Kobayashi, Andrae, Balmaseda, Balsamo, Bauer, Bechtold, Beljaars, van de Berg, Bidlot, Bormann, Delsol, Dragani, Fuentes, Geer, Haimberger, Healy, Hersbach, Hlm, Isaksen, Kllberg, 10 To construct our sample of local heatwave shocks, we begin by matching daily maximum temperatures to customer and supplier firms by based on the closest ERA-interim latitude-longitude grid nodes for the geocoded addresses of our sample firms.

Next, we convert the temperatures from Kelvin to °Celsius and identify the start and end dates of heatwaves. Following the heatwave definition of the National Weather Service, we label spells of three or more days with daily maximum temperatures over 30° Celsius by firm location as the occurrence of a heatwave (National Weather Service, 2019)9 .

Additionally, we compute the duration of the heatwaves by location and heatwave, and aggregate the number of heatwave days on the monthly, and later on the firm-quarter level. Table 2b reports summary statistics on climate shocks affecting the customers and suppliers in our sample.

As Panel A (customers) and B (supplier) of Table 2b show, the firms in our sample are regularly exposed to heatwaves, 29.8% of customer-firm-quarters and 36% of supplier-firm-quarters are affected by at least one heatwave in our sample. The average length of the heatwaves (consecutive days over 30° C) is substantial with an average of 23.8 heatwave days per financial quarter for suppliers, conditional on the occurrence of a heatwave, and 24.2 days for customers.

On average, suppliers and customers are exposed to similar temperatures, with a sample average temperature of 18.6° Celsius (18.5° Celsius) for the customers (suppliers). 2.4.2 Floods Second, we obtain data on global surface water levels to determine whether firms are affected by flooding incidents in a given quarter.

While surface temperatures are the most commonly cited consequence of global climate change, the scientific literature widely agrees that flooding incidents will also increase significantly in frequency and severity in the future as a direct result of climate change, i.e. due to heavy rainfall, rapid melting of snow and ice, and parched soil (CSSR, 2017).

At the same time, flooding can cause significant economic damage, providing us with a second type of climate shock that potentially affects firms in a different way than heatwaves. We gather information on surface water levels from the Dartmouth Flood Observatory.

To compile this data, the Dartmouth Observatory models the earth surface as a set of highly granular Koehler, Matricardi, McNally, Monge-Sanz, Morcrette, Park, Peubey, de Rosnay, Tavolato, Thpaut, and Vitart 2011 provide a detailed description of the data set. 9 Precisely, the National Weather Services defines heatwaves as “three or more consecutive days with the temperature reaching or exceeding 90 degrees (Fahrenheit)”.

11 polygons and uses on satellite images and remote sensing sources to identify flooding of inundated ares. In addition, the observatory collects information on floods from news and governmental sources. The dataset includes start and end dates for each flood and detailed geographical information on the inundated areas polygons, from 1984 until today. The dataset further provides additional information on the floods such as the associated damages, size of the affected area, and deaths.

We rely on the flood polygons used by the Dartmouth Observatory to spatially match the coordinates of our sample firms to the areas affected by the floods using the software QGIS. Compared to the country-level flooding data used in previous research, this approach allows us to determine more precisely if a given firm location was inundated at a given point in time.

Equivalent to the procedure outlined in Section 2.4.1 for the heatwave records, we compute the number of days for which a firm was exposed to a given flood, and aggregate the count of floods on a monthly basis. Panel A and B of Table 2b illustrate the aggregate flooding summary statistics at the firm-quarter level. On average, suppliers and customers experience floods in 6.0% and 6.1% of all firm-quarters.

The average number of 26.7 (30.8) casualties conditional on the occurrence of a flood suggests that we observe flood events with a substantial magnitude. 2.4.3 EM-DAT Disaster Data For additional robustness tests in Section 3 we also include climate shock data from the international disaster database EM-DAT provided by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED, 2011).

EM-DAT is one of the most commonly used datasets in the literature on the economic cost of climate hazards.10 To compare our heatwave and flood data with the country-level EM-DAT disaster, we first distinguish if the temperature-related EM-DAT events are heatwaves or cold spells. Subsequently, we aggregate flood and heat events on a monthly basis based on the start and end dates, and combine the disaster data with our local records from the ECMWF and the Darthmouth Flood Observatory.

Table 2b provides the EM-DAT summary statistics. We conjecture that our high-granularity heatwave and flood incidents data and the country-level data from EM-DAT differ along two dimensions. First, using country-level information naturally overstates the extent to which firms have been affected by natural disasters. In that case, the EM-DAT shocks would overstate firms’ exposure to both floods and heatwaves.

Second, the salience 10 See for example: Strömberg, 2007; Noy, 2009; Lesk, Rowhani, and Ramankutty, 2016 12 of the two hazard types and the probability that events are registered should differ across data sources. Both heat and flood events are recorded by EM-DAT only if they either caused ten or more associated casualties, affected more than 100 people, lead to the declaration of a state of emergency, or resulted in a call for international assistance.

While floods are highly visible, the relevance of extreme temperatures and heatwaves can be contingent on the context, and hence more difficult to identify. Therefore, we expect that the disaster data only captures a subset of both floods and heatwaves that we can detect locally, particularly in the case of heatwaves. In line with this reasoning, the average number of flood-affected firm-quarter observations is significantly higher based on the country-level match compared to the EM-DAT match.

For instance, suppliers are physically exposed to floods only 6.1% of the time according to the local data, compared to 49% if we match based on EM-DAT country-level records. The opposite holds for heatwaves. While our local data suggests that heatwaves occur frequently, the disaster statistics yield a much lower affected numbers of firm-quarters - despite the geographic overestimation.

3 Direct Exposure to Climate Shocks We begin our analysis by studying the direct effects of climate shocks on the supplier firms in our sample. This exercise is important to verify that the shocks we study in this paper indeed have an economically significant effect on firm operating performance. Many of the regions most severely affected by climate change are located outside of the developed countries of North America and Western Europe.

Hence, our analysis complements the results in Somanathan, Somanathan, Sudarshan, and Tewari (2015); Zhang et al. (2018); Addoum et al. (2019), as we study the effect of heatwaves on firm earnings and performance in a global setting. Further, by also studying flooding incidents – in addition to local heatwaves – we are able to compare the economic effects of different climate change related risks.

In our main analysis we focus on heatwave and flooding data from ECMWF and the Dartmouth Observatory, as the EM-DAT disaster data is less granular for floods and too restrictive for heatwaves, as documented in Section 2.4.3. One important consideration for our tests is that firms likely adjust to the average climate hazard exposure in production locations.

If managers understand climate risks and organize production to maximize profits, they might choose (not) to produce in certain places if adjustment potential 13 is (in)sufficient, or they adjust the production equipment to match the expected climate exposure – contingent on the firm’s financial capacity to do so. Hence, it the cross-sectional relationship between climate exposure variables and firm financial performance is likely endogenous.

However, while managers can base their decisions on expected climate exposure, they do not have power over the weather variation over time and the exact timing of climate shocks. Moreover, both floods and heatwaves can only be predicted with precision on short horizons, which are unlikely to allow for substantial adjustment in the production planning.

Therefore, the variation in climate shocks over time is an exogenous source of variation and randomly distributed once we condition on fixed firm locations. This allows us to identify the causal impact of floods and heatwaves on firm operating performance. We isolate the effect of time-series variation in climate shocks for a given firm on firm operating performance by estimating OLS regressions with firm-by-quarter fixed effects.

By interacting firm-fixed effects and quarter fixed effects, our model absorbs both any time-invariant firm-level characteristics, as well as firm-specific seasonal effects during the four quarters of the year. This is important because firm operating performance varies seasonally throughout the year, and this seasonal variation might be correlated with the occurrence of climate shocks. Further, we include industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects to absorb any industry-specific time trends.

Our two main variables for measuring firm operating performance in the following regression models are sales turnover and profitability. Specifically, we use quarterly revenues and operating income, divided by assets. We specifically focus on these two measures – as opposed to for example earnings – since revenues and operating income are harder to manipulate by firms’ strategic accounting - and the incentive to smooth earnings might be particularly high following adverse financial shocks.

In principle, the location-specific variation in flood and heat shocks over time cannot be actively influenced by firm choices. However, as climate shocks could randomly coincide with changes in firm characteristics over time, we additionally introduce size, age, and profitability specific time fixed effects.

For this purpose, we sort all firms into size, age, and profitability terciles and interact the grouping variables with year-quarter fixed effects in our main specification, following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016).

Specifically, we estimate models of the following form, clustering robust standard 14 errors on the firm level in line with Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016): yiqt = 0 X βt × Climate Shocksiqt + µiq + γnqt + δBS2016 + iqt (1) t=−k where yiqt is either Revenue/Assets (Rev/AT) or Operating Income/Assets (OpI/AT) of firm i in quarter q of year t, Climate Shocksiqt is a dummy variable indicating the occurrence of a heatwave or flood in the location of firm i in year-quarter qt, µiq are firm-by-quarter fixed effects, γnqt are industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects based on 2-digit SIC codes, and δBS2016 are firm size, age, and profitability × time fixed effects as in Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016).

In robustness tests, we also use the count of climate events by financial quarter as an alternative specification. As it is ex-ante unclear if the financial impact of climate shocks manifests immediately or with some delay throughout the financial year, we estimate two different specification of the outline model. First, we limit the climate shock observations to the current financial quarter and second, i.e. we restrict k = 0, second we additionally include three lags of three periods, i.e. k = 3.

[Insert Table 3 here.] Table 3 reports the regression results for Equation (1). In Panel A we estimate regressions without climate shock lags, in Panel B we additionally include three lags of climate shock events. The results in both panels indicate that heatwaves and floods adversely impact the bottom line of our supplier firms. However, the results also show that the full financial impact only becomes visible over the course of the financial year.

On the one hand, we find a very small contemporaneous impact of heat events on firm operating performance, as both the effect on sales turnover and profitability is statistically indistinguishable from zero in Panel A. At the same time, the occurrence of a flood is associated with an average decrease in Revenue/Assets of 0.19 percentage points, and a decrease in operating income over assets between 0.095 to 0.1 percentage points.

On the other hand, Panel B indicates that the financial impact of heatwaves and floods is in fact much larger than the simple analysis of contemporaneous climate shocks suggests, in line with the findings of Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). When we include three lags of climate shocks in Equation (1) while holding the sample fixed, we find a material impact of heatwaves on both Rev/AT and OpI/AT between one to three financial firm quarters after the occurrence of a heatwave.

15 The coefficient estimate for the effect of heatwaves on sales turnover in columns (1) and (2) is between -0.25 to -0.26 (statistically significant at the 5 and 10% level), and between -0.09 to -0.12 for operating margin in columns (3) and (4) for the coefficients with a lag of two to three quarters.

Floods similarly decrease sales turnover (between -0.25 and -0.29 percentage points, statistically significant on the 5% and 10% level) and profitability (-0.11 to -0.12 percentage points, significant on the 1% level) in the contemporaneous and the previous two financial quarters.

Given the average operating margin (OpI/AT) of 2% and sales turnover (Rev/AT) of 22% in our supplier sample, the mean effects are economically meaningful, representing approximately a 1% reduction in sales turnover and a 5.5% reduction in operating income over assets, relative to the sample mean. The documented difference in how quickly financial performance measures reflect the occurrence of climate shocks could have important implications for market participants.

If heatwaves are reflected by accounting measures of firm performance with a delay, it becomes more difficult for investors to understand the link between the such temperature events and firm performance. Hence, this delay could help explain the underreaction of investors to firms’ exposure to extreme temperatures, documented in the recent literature (Addoum et al., 2019; Pankratz et al., 2019). Our results naturally raise questions regarding the economic mechanisms driving the observed effects.

In the context of heatwaves, a large literature in economics has focused on the channels through which extreme temperatures can cause aggregate economic losses11 . With regard to floods, these channels have been studied less explicitly, but the observed net effect could be caused by damages to assets, equipment and infrastructure, as well as production distortions during the floods, e.g. if worker safety is endangered and production thereby constrained throughout the duration of the floods.

As the focus of our analysis lies on the direct and indirect performance implications of climate shocks and the adaptation of supply-chain managers, we remain agnostic about the precise mechanics of the directly observable effects in this paper. We conduct several robustness tests for the direct effects of climate shocks on firm operating performance.

First, we estimate the impact of the climate shocks on supplier performance after replacing heatwave and flood dummies with counting variables indicating the number of climate events per financial quarter.

The results are reported in Appendix Table A1 and show that the 11 Previous research documents that electricity prices increase with heat exposure (Pechan and Eisenack, 2014), while water supply tightens (Mishra and Singh, 2010) and both cognitive and physical worker performance are compromised (Sepannen, Fisk, and Lei, 2006; Xiang, Bi, Pisaniello, and Hansen, 2014). 16 statistical significance and overall pattern remain similar for this alternative specification.

Moreover, the statistically strongest effects of heatwaves again appear to occur with a delay of two quarters after the firm was exposed to the heatwaves. Similarly, and in line with our main test in Table 3, contemporaneous floods have a significant immediate as well as a two-quarter delayed impact on sales turnover and operating income.

When we use the count of heatwaves and floods per quarter for our estimations, the magnitude of the coefficient estimates is naturally smaller than the aggregate effect for all events in a financial quarter estimated in Table 3. As our final robustness test on the direct impact of climate shocks, we estimate the impact of heatwave and flooding disasters on supplier performance using the country-level data from EM-DAT.

Overall, the results reported in Appendix Table A2 confirm our conjecture from Section 2.4.3: for evaluating the financial impact of climate shocks on the firm level the use of climate data with high geographical granularity is essential.

While heatwaves identified as disasters in the EM-DAT database are negatively correlated with supplier performance only in the specifications in columns (1) and (2) and with a delay of one financial quarter, the coefficient estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero, or even positive in all other specifications.

4 Indirect Exposure to Climate Shocks Based on our result from the previous Section 3, showing that heatwaves and floods significantly decrease supplier operating performance, we next test if climate hazards propagate downstream along supply-chain links.

Since particularly the largest corporations traded on international stock exchanges rely on extensive, worldwide production networks, it is important to better understand if even firms which are not located in areas with a high climate risk exposure can indirectly be harmed by increases in the intensity of climate hazards due to their (remote) suppliers.

Analogous to our previous tests, we use sales turnover and profitability, measured by revenue over assets and operating income over assets, as our two main dependent variables for assessing whether climate risk is indeed propagated along supply-chains are. Despite the adverse direct effect on suppliers documented above, the implications of climate shocks for supplier and customer performance might differ.

On the one hand, customer firms could be unaffected by shocks to supplying firms if suppliers cannot pass on the incurred costs downstream. At the same time, 17 customers could also include climate factors in their contingency management, enabling them switch suppliers without incurring large costs if a specific supplier is hit by a heatwave or flooding.

In both cases, neither heat nor flood related shocks would propagate from suppliers to customer along the supply-chain, and we should not be able to document a significant impact of climate shocks to suppliers on customer financial performance. On the other hand, environmental shocks such as heatwaves or floods can cause supply-chain glitches and lower production output at the supplier and customer level.

These disruptions are particularly likely if the provided inputs have a high level of specificity (Barrot and Sauvagnat, 2016). If climate shocks to suppliers on average cause distortions, we would expect to find a negative relation between customer financial performance and supplier exposure to climate risk. To test these competing hypotheses, we require two identifying assumptions.

As in the previous analysis, it is problematic to study this question in the cross-section, as the exposure of customer firms to climate shocks through suppliers might be endogenous. For instance, if certain industries systematically depend on specific inputs from suppliers clustered in risky areas, climate shocks and customer firm performance might be endogenously correlated.

In contrast, it is reasonable to assume that the variation in supplier exposure to climate shocks over time is unrelated to time invariant firm characteristics such as industry associations.12 Therefore, analogous to our model in Equation (1), all our results in this section are due to within-firm-pair variation over time. Second, customer firms could experience similar performance effects as their suppliers when they themselves are hit by climate shocks.

Therefore, to ensure that our results are not due climate shocks affecting customer firms directly, we exclude all customers-supplier pairs with customers located within a 500 kilometer radius of the affected supplier from our analysis. Based on these considerations, we estimate two different models.

In our first set of tests we estimate pooled OLS regressions of the following form, ycsqt = 0 X βt × Climate Shockscsqt + µcsq + γn(c)t + δBS2016 + csqt (2) t=−3 where ycsqt is either Revenue/Assets or Operating Income/Assets of customer c in quarter q of 12 In our later analyses, we find that firms tend to terminate relationships with suppliers that face increases in climate shock exposure compared to historical, expected levels of climate risk.

However, the tendency of customers to cut off suppliers that are particularly exposed to climate risk should only bias our effects downward.

18 year t, Climate Shockscsqt is a dummy variable indicating the occurrence of a heatwave or flood in the location of supplier s in year-quarter qt, µcsq are supplier-customer pair-by-quarter fixed effects, γn(c)qt are customer industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects based on 2-digit SIC codes, and δBS2016 are customer firm size, age, and profitability × year-quarter fixed effects similar to Equation (1). The unit of observation in these test is at the customer-supplier-year-quarter level.

By including pair-by-quarter fixed effects (γn(c)qt ), our model subsumes all time-invariant relationship characteristics (e.g. supplier and customer country characteristics, languages, geographical distance, average input specificity, average relationship strength, and firm fixed effects) as well as relationshipspecific seasonal patterns. Our results are therefore obtained from time-series variation in a given firm-pair for the same quarter of the year.

In our second set of tests, we collapse our panel observations at the customer level by aggregating over all suppliers of a given customer, and estimate regressions of the following form, ycqt = 0 X βt × Climate Shockscqt + µcq + γn(c)t + δBS2016 + cqt (3) t=−3 where ycqt again captures customer firm operating performance, and µcq , γn(c)t , and δBS2016 are fixed effects at the customer-by-quarter, industry-by-year-by-quarter, and size/age/ROA × year-quarter level.

Climate Shockscqt is obtained as the maximum of Climate Shockscsqt over all suppliers s of customer c in period qt. The unit of observation in these tests as at the customer-year-quarter level. Based on our findings in Section 3, we include lags of k = 3 periods for the climate shocks in both Model (2) and (3).

In line with our identifying assumptions that the variation over time in flood and heat shocks on suppliers are exogenous and that the supplier shocks only affect customers through the supply chain link, other characteristics of the customer firms should not be systematically correlated with both the outcome and the flood and heatwave occurrence.

Hence, we do not include firm-level controls in our main specification, but again add size, age, and profitability times quarter fixed effects to control for different firm profiles, analogous to Equation 2. In line with Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), we cluster robust standard errors on the relationship and on the customer firm level in Equations (2) and (3), respectively.

19 4.1 Climate Shock Propagation – Results Table 4 reports the results for our first test on customers’ sensitivity to supplier climate risk exposure, as detailed in Equation (2). The unit of observation in Panel A is at the supplier-customer-yearquarter level. The first four columns show the impact of supplier heatwaves, columns (5) to (8) report the effect of supplier floods.

With regard to heatwaves, we find tentative evidence that the climate shocks on suppliers propagate along the supply chain. Specifically, we find a negative impact (coefficient -0.044) of heatwaves at the supplier locations on customer revenues in column (2), statistically significant at the 10% level. All other coefficient estimates for the propagation effect of heatwaves lagged by one to three quarters are marginally not statistically significant.

However, all coefficient estimates carry negative signs, and the difference in the magnitude between the impact of heatwaves on revenues and operating income is in line with the estimations of the direct impact of heat on supplier firms. Hence, while the observed effect is small in our sample, our finding is still economically meaningful, given that the frequency of heatwaves is projected to increase substantially in the future due to ongoing climate change.

In comparison, the shock propagation of floods is unambiguous and both statistically and economically large. According to our estimates, customer revenue over assets decreases between 0.10 to 0.16 percentage points in three quarters after the supplier has initially been exposed to a flood. Moreover, customers’ operating income is reduced by 0.02 up to 0.04 percentage points (all effects significant on the 1% level).

These magnitudes are economically meaningful even at low climate shock frequencies: Compared to the sample median, the occurrence of a flood at the supplier firm reduces customer revenue and operating income by 1.8% and 2.2%, respectively. [Insert Table 4 here.] In Panel B of Table 4, we show the results for the sample collapsed on the customer level, implementing the model in Equation (3).

Again, we find evidence that the climate shocks on supplier firms propagate along the supply chain with a tentative, statistically negative impact of heatwaves at the supplier locations on operating income (column (3), coefficient estimate of -0.052, significant at the 5% level). For floods, the results are similar in magnitude to our first set of tests using the full panel.

The impact of floods at one of a given customer’s supplier firms reduces revenues over assets between -0.15 and -0.16 percentage points (statistically significant at the 10% and 5% level), 20 with a lag of two calendar quarters. Further, floods have a significant negative effect on operating income (coefficient estimates between -0.053 and -0.045 percentage points, significant at the 5% and 10% level), with a lag of one quarter.

Taken together, our results provide evidence that climate change related shocks can propagate downstream along the supply-chain. This finding indicates that climate change could affect even firms in relatively ‘climate-safe’ parts of the world as supply-chains span the globe.

On average, the results also suggest that suppliers can pass some of the cost caused by climate shocks on to customers, or that not all customers in our sample are fully hedged against idiosyncratic shocks to their suppliers through their contingency management. while the evidence on the side of heatwaves is tentative13 , the flood-related effects are pronounced both in a statistical and economic sense.

Our results are consistent with Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), who document that the financial shocks imposed by natural disasters propagate along the supply chain when inputs are specific. 4.2 Climate Shock Propagation – Robustness We conduct a number of robustness with respect to our findings on the propagation of climate shocks.

First, to verify that the effects we observe are indeed attributable to climate shock transmission through supply-chain linkages, we implement a placebo test based on the start and end dates of our sample supply-chain relationships. Specifically, we re-estimate our regressions models specified in Equations (2) and (3) using the same sample of supplier-customer relationships.

However, in our placebo tests we use only the periods before and after a given supplier-customer pair was engaged in a supply-chain relationship. [Insert Table 5 here.]

If the supply-chain data from FactSet Revere correctly identifies the beginning and end of our sample supplier-customer relations, and our results in Section 4.1 are indeed due to the propagation of climate shocks, we should not find a negative effect of supplier climate shocks on customer firm operating performance in the placebo sample.

Indeed, as reported in Table 5, we do not find a 13 Given the marginally insignificant results for the heatwave-based tests, it is important to bear in mind that the empirical setting biases the results downwards.

First, if a share of the customers in the sample has a strong contingency management with several alternative suppliers, and second, if managers respond to operational distortions caused by troubled suppliers, and replace suppliers that are particularly exposed, so that affected supply-chain links systematically drop out of the sample.

21 negative relation between supplier climate shocks and customer firm performance, neither when conducting the tests on the full customer-supplier pair level sample (Panel A), nor on the collapsed sample at the customer level (Panel B). As an additional robustness test, we estimate the shock propagation based on a count measure of heatwaves and floods instead of an indicator variable. The results are reported in Appendix Table A3.

Again, we find weak evidence for a propagation of heatwave-related shocks on the supplier to the customer operating income (column 2, coefficient estimate of -0.015, significant at the 5% level) and strong evidence for the propagation of flood related shocks. Last, we repeat our tests using the country-level climate shock data from EM-DAT, analogously to Section 3. The results are reported in Appendix Table A4.

In line with our results focusing on the direct effect of climate shocks, we cannot document a consistent relation between customer performance and the climate disaster measures from EM-DAT. 5 Supply-Chain Adaptation Our results in the previous sections show that climate-related shocks matter for firm financial performance, both directly and indirectly through supply chain links. Hence, managers have an incentive to monitor the climate-change related risk imposed by their suppliers.

In this section, we empirically test if managers indeed take climate-risk considerations into account by adapting their to supply-chain relationships. 5.1 Climate Trends and Supplier Termination We first test if climate-change risk increases the likelihood that a supplier-customer relationship is terminated. On the one hand, costly climate-related shocks could cause operational issues at a given supplier, making the firm a less attractive supply chain partner going forward.

On the other hand, customer and supplier firms often make substantial relationship-specific investments to set up and maintain a supply chain relationship. It is unclear if the adverse financial consequences of climate risk exposure are sufficiently high to result in the termination of an existing customer-supplier relationship. We use the FactSet Revere information on the start and end dates of customer-supplier relation22 ships to test these hypotheses.

To construct the main outcome variable, we generate a panel of firm years in which the customer-supplier relationships are active, and set the dummy variable 1 (End) to take the value of one in the last year a given supply-chain relationship is reported in FactSet Revere. To avoid mechanical issues in the last year of our sample we drop observations from 2017.

To construct our main variable of interest capturing supplier climate risk exposure, we start with the assumption that managers trade off potential climate-related risks with other firm characteristics such as product quality, costs and delivery times when entering a supply-chain relationship. Under this scenario, a customer firm is generally aware of climate risks associated with a given supplier and continuously weighs the costs and benefits of remaining in the relationship.

As long as the costs of leaving a given relationship exceed the costs of staying, the customer will continue the relationship with a supplier. If this assumption holds, realized climate shocks over the course of a supply-chain relationship that fall within the normal, ex-ante anticipated range of events given a supplier’s location and climate risk will not substantially influence the likelihood that the supplier is dropped, all else equal.

However, if realized climate risks increase beyond the anticipated levels, and in ways that firms are not prepared for or hedged against, it would reduce the economic viability of a supplier-customer relationship and increase the profitability that the relationship ends. To test this conjecture, we construct the measure 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t), as illustrated in Figure 3.

We first estimate the expected number of climate shocks per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of five14 yearsbefore the establishment of any given supplier-customer relationship. 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t) then takes the value of one in year t, if the difference between the realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of shocks, and zero otherwise.

In econometric terms, our following test again relies on two identifying assumptions. First, we exploit the fact that climate trends, besides the timing of climate shocks, are to a large extent random over time and cannot be predicted with precision. Hence, managers can incorporate expected levels of climate risk exposure, but not deviations from the expectation into their decision making.

Second, to be able to assume that the estimated effect is not caused by the direct impact of changing climate risk on the customer, we again exclude all customers-supplier pairs with customers located 14 In robustness tests, we use seven, ten, and fifteen years, respectively. 23 within a 500 kilometer radius of the affected supplier.

Based on these assumptions, our measure of realized vs. expected climate risk is orthogonal to other firm decisions, and our corresponding estimate reflects the impact of the change in supplier climate shock exposure.

We estimate the following linear probability model, 1 (End)sct = β × 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks)st + µcs + γn(s)t + ρc(s)t + int (4) where 1 (End)sct is an indicator taking the value of one in year t if it is the last year on record of the relation between supplier s and customer c. To control for potential confounding effects, we estimate the regressions with several dimensions of fixed effects.

First, we include relationship fixed-effects µcs in all specification to account for supplier characteristics that impact the probability of a relationship to end, but do not vary over time. For instance, suppliers could face a fixed probability of termination based on their industry association. Further, we include supplier industry-by-year fixed effects γn(s)t to account for industry trends, for example related to the extent to which customers switch from buying inputs to manufacturing inputs.

We also add supplier country-year fixed effects ρc(s)t to account for changing macroeconomic risks that impact whether customer firms maintain supplier-relationships. In addition, we estimate the model with supplier country-customer-year × customer country-year fixed effects, to account for changes in international trade dynamics, such as changing barriers or import-related costs. We cluster robust standard errors on the relationship level. [Insert Table 6 here.] Table 6 reports the results.

Across all specifications, we find a robust, positive impact of high realized vs. expected climate exposure on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination.

In line with the results on the financial impact of the climate hazards as well as the financial propagation of the shocks in the supply chains, the results suggest that increases in flood exposure increase the probability a supply-chain relationship ends on average by 3.7 percentage points (column 8, coefficient significant at the 1%-level).

The impact of heatwave exposure increases is equally strong in terms of its statistical significance but economically smaller at percentage points (column 4, coefficient statistically significant at the 1%-level). The difference in the magnitude between floods and heatwaves is in line with the stronger direct and indirect impact of floods compared to heatwaves 24 documented in Sections 3 and 4.

Both the estimate for heatwaves and floods are economically meaningful, given the unconditional expectation of 15.12% that a supply chain relationship ends in any given year in our sample. To test the robustness of this result, we change the horizon over which we compute the expected number of floods or heatwaves per year.

Appendix Table A5 indicates that the results are robust when we extend the period from 5 to 7, 10, or 15 years, as both the estimates for heatwaves and floods remain very similar in magnitude and significance. Moreover, we test whether the results remain stable when we include additional time-variant financial control variables for both the supplier and customer firms.

Thereby, we control for changes in the financial health of the firms which could otherwise influence the probability of the continuation of the relationship. As Appendix Table A6 shows, the results again remain very similar both in magnitude and significance when we control for changes in the debt-to-assets ratio, the log price-to-book ratio, and firm size proxied by the natural logarithm of the market value of equity.

5.2 Climate Shocks and Supplier Termination To validate our assumption that managers take climate risks into account when establishing supply-chain relations, we next replace our measure of realized vs. expected climate risk with a simple measure of realized climate shocks since the beginning of the supplier relationship.

If the general level of climate risk exposure is taken into consideration before forming supply chain relationships, climate shocks per se should not be a strong determinant of supplier termination. We again estimate the model in Equation (4), replacing 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) with Climate Shocks (t) of the supplier firm. [Insert Table 7 here.] The results, reported in table Table 7 show the sensitivity of supply-chain relationship continuation to realized climate shocks.

Depending on the dimension of fixed effects, we find a small, positive impact of heatwave and flood occurrence on the probability that a supply-chain relationship ends for some specifications.

However, the economic magnitude of this effect is small: For heatwaves, the probability of termination is increases by 0.16 to 0.17 percentage points (columns 3 and 4, coefficients significant at the 5% level), for floods, there is some evidence of an increase by 0.29 to 25 0.33 percentage points (columns 5 and 6, coefficients significant at the 1%-level). This effect is an order of magnitude smaller and insignificant compared to the tests based on realized vs. expected climate risk.

Taken together, our results are consistent with the notion that managers are taking climate risks into consideration when entering a supply-chain relation. Also, the results suggest that increases in climate risk exposure can be an important determinant of the probability of the continuation of the relationships. If this effect holds globally, it could have important implications for international development.

According to Burke et al., 2015b and Carleton and Hsiang, 2016, developing countries around the world are most severely affected by the outcomes of global climate change. If financial incentives from supply-chain disruptions motivate ’Northern’ firms to further shift economic activity from ‘Southern’ to ‘Northern’ countries, the effect could contribute to widening global economic inequality.

5.3 Climate Risk Exposure of Old and New Suppliers To shed further light on the question how firms adapt their supply-chains to climate change, and to examine if climate risks are indeed driving the formation of production networks, we next study if customers switch from high risk to low risk suppliers based on climate exposure.

As we showed in the previous section, realized climate shocks in exceedance of previously anticipated levels can increase the likelihood that a given supplier relationship ends. However, it is unclear if managers understand the link between climate risk exposure and financial performance, and hence mitigate these risks by switching to different suppliers with lower climate exposure.

Instead, customer managers might simply observe the adverse financial effects of (indirect) climate shocks without considering climate risk as an underlying driver of financial performance effects. Under this scenario, we would not expect to find a difference in climate risk exposure between ‘old’ suppliers whose supply-chain relationships are terminated and ‘new’ replacement suppliers.

To test this conjecture, we limit our dataset to supplier-customer links with a known end date, retaining approximately 60,000 observations.15 Of course, not all supplier-customer relationships in our sample end because of climate risk considerations.

However, the noise introduced by this 15 Note that in contrast to the performance-related tests, in this setting we do not condition on the availability of performance information for customer and supplier firms 26 measurement error would bias us against finding significant results. For each supplier whose relationship with a customer ends throughout our sample period (i.e.

‘old’ supplier), we then identify (likely) replacement suppliers who entered a new supply-chain relationship with the same customer within the next two years, as reported in FactSet Revere. We require replacement candidates to have the same four-digit SIC code as the ‘old’ supplier, and consider only supplychain relationships recorded by FactSet analysts for the first time in the two years after the ‘old’ supply-chain relationship ended.

After applying these constraints, we identify 100,000 combinations of terminated and replacement suppliers. Next, we compare the climate hazard exposure of actual supplier firms during the active years of the initial (‘old’) supply-chain relationship and their respective, likely, replacements. Figure 4 illustrates the construction of the test.

First, we compare the number of climate shocks of the actual, replaced supplier to the exposure that a replacement supplier would have had during the time period in which the original relationship was active. Second, we estimate and compare the number of climate shocks that actual and replacement suppliers were exposed to throughout the whole sample period from 1984 to 2017. Third, we compare the time period after which the original supply-chain relationship has ended.

In all tests, we keep the observed years between the actual, original, and hypothetical replacement suppliers constant. This requirement is important to ensure that year-specific climate trends do not confound the comparison. [Insert Table 8 here.] Table 8 reports the mean differences and t-statistics of the comparison of the exposure of all replaced suppliers and replacement suppliers.

We conduct three tests per climate hazard: first, based on the realized shocks throughout the entire sample period, second, based on the duration of the supply-chain relationship, and third, based on the time thereafter until 2017. Focusing on heatwaves, we find that replacement suppliers are on average less exposed during the original, terminated relationship period, experiencing 0.83 fewer heatwaves on average.

In the period after the termination and during the time in which the new relationships are active, this difference further increases to 2.0 fewer heatwaves (all differences are significantly different from zero at the 1% level). The same pattern holds with regards to floods.

Whereas potential replacement suppliers are slightly less exposed to floods during the original relationship period (difference of -0.031, significant at 27 the 1% level), the difference becomes more pronounced after the termination of the original link (difference of -0.33, significant at the 1% level). Hence, our results are consistent with the notion that climate risks can drive the formation of supply-chain relations.

If suppliers are negatively impacted by climate shocks and the cost of these shocks are shared in supply chains, managers face a financial incentive to manage the extent to which they are indirectly exposed to climate risk. Moreover, we observe that supplier climate risk exposure beyond expected levels increases the probability that customers switch suppliers.

In line with the notion that these switches are climate related, managers appear to identify less sensitive supplier firms as alternatives to the original supply-chain partner. 6 Conclusion In this paper, we combine temporally and spatially granular data on heatwaves and flooding from the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) and the Darthmouth Flood Observatory with a detailed dataset on global supply chain relationships from FactSet Revere.

We obtain a climate-supply-chain database with 4,289 (4,568) suppliers (customers) across 51 countries around the world from 2003 to 2017, and investigate two questions: First, do climate shocks matter financially, and do they propagate along supply chains? And second, if so, how do firms respond to changing climate risk exposure in their supply chain networks? We present two main insights.

First, we test if climate change exposure has direct and indirect firm performance effects due to supply chain networks. We find that the financial performance of suppliers is negatively associated with heatwaves and flooding incidents, and show that the financial consequences of these climate shocks propagate to customers through supply chain links. Second, we study how firms adapt their supply-chain organizations in response to climate change risks.

We find that firms are more likely to end relationships with suppliers which experience an unexpectedly high number of climate shocks compared to expectations formed at the beginning of the supply-chain relationship. Moreover, in substituting these suppliers, firms diversify their supplier network and replace high-climate-risk with lower-climate-risk suppliers. Our results both on climate shock transmission and supply chain adaptation are economically meaningful.

For instance, we find that heatwaves and floods are associated with a subsequent 28 reduction of 4% in sales turnover and 10% in profitability at the directly affect firm, relative to the sample median. In terms of the adaptation effects, unexpectedly high numbers of floods and heatwaves increase the probability that customers abandon their suppliers by 4% and 1% compared to the unconditional sample probability of a customer-supplier relationship termination of 15%.

Our finding have two important, potential implications with regard to the impact of climate change on internationally diversified firms, and the impact of the adaptation efforts of these firms on international economic development.

First, while developing countries are likely to experience the most pronounced increases in climate shocks, the results on the indirect impact of climate shocks suggest that economic impact of climate change is likely to be – at least partially – shared through economic links in global production networks.

Second, if firms in high-climate risk countries are more likely to be substituted by customers in favor of suppliers in less vulnerable locations, the outlined effects could further economically weaken the areas most vulnerable to climate change. Our study contributes to the rapidly growing academic literature on the financial impact of climate change, and is among the first studies to provide evidence on how firms adapt to climate change.

29 References Addoum, J. M., D. T. Ng, and A. Ortiz-Bobea (2019). Temperature shocks and earning news. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming. Auffhammer, M. (2018). Quantifying economic damages from climate change. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4), 33–52. Baldauf, M., L. Garlappi, and C. Yannelis (2019). Does climate change affect real estate prices? Only if you believe in it. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming. Banerjee, S., S. Dasgupta, and Y. Kim (2008).

Buyer–supplier relationships and the stakeholder theory of capital structure. Journal of Finance 63 (5), 2507–2552. Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and M. Ochoa (2016). Price of long-run temperature shifts in capital markets. Working Paper 22529, National Bureau of Economic Research. Barrot, J.-N. and J. Sauvagnat (2016). Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks in production networks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1543–1592. Boehm, C. E., A. Flaaen, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2019).

Input linkages and the transmission of shocks: Firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake. The Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (1), 60–75. BSR (2018). Climate & Supply Chain – The business case for action. Available at: https://www.bsr.org/ reports/BSR_Climate_and_Supply_Chain_Management.pdf. Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015a). Climate and conflict. Annual Review of Economics 7 (1), 577–617. Burke, M., S. M. Hsiang, and E. Miguel (2015b).

Global non-linear effect of temperature on economic production. Nature 527 (7577), 235. Carleton, T. A. and S. M. Hsiang (2016). Social and economic impacts of climate. Science 353 (6304). Cen, L., F. Chen, Y. Hou, and G. D. Richardson (2018). Strategic disclosures of litigation loss contingencies when customer-supplier relationships are at risk. The Accounting Review 93 (2), 137–159. Cen, L., S. Dasgupta, R. Elkamhi, and R. S. Pungaliya (2015).

Reputation and loan contract terms: The role of principal customers. Review of Finance 20 (2), 501–533. Cen, L., E. L. Maydew, L. Zhang, and L. Zuo (2017). Customer–supplier relationships and corporate tax avoidance. Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2), 377–394. Cohen, L. and A. Frazzini (2008). Economic links and predictable returns. Journal of Finance 63 (4), 1977–2011. CRED (2011). EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED international disaster database. Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters.

Université Catholique de Louvain Brussels, Belgium. CSSR (2017). Climate science special report. In D. Wuebbles, D. Fahey, K. Hibbard, D. Dokken, B. Stewart, and T. Maycock (Eds. ), Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I. U.S. Global Change Research Program.

Dee, D. P., S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi, U. Andrae, M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, P. Bechtold, A. C. Beljaars, L. van de Berg, J. Bidlot, N. Bormann, C. Delsol, R. Dragani, M. Fuentes, A. J. Geer, L. Haimberger, S. B. Healy, H. Hersbach, E. V. Hlm, L. Isaksen, P. Kllberg, M. Koehler, M. Matricardi, A. P. McNally, B. M. Monge-Sanz, J. Morcrette, B. Park, C. Peubey, P. de Rosnay, C. Tavolato, J. Thpaut, and F. Vitart (2011).

The era-interim reanalysis: configuration and 30 performance of the data assimilation system. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 137, 553–597. Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. A. Olken (2014). What do we learn from the weather? The new climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3), 740–98. Feng, S., A. B. Krüger, and M. Oppenheimer (2010). Linkages among climate change, crop yields, and Mexico–US cross-border migration.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (32), 14257–14262. Ginglinger, E. and Q. Moreau (2019). Climate risk and capital structure. Working Paper, Université Paris-Dauphine. Graff-Zivin, J., S. M. Hsiang, and M. Neidell (2018). Temperature and human capital in the short and long run. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 5 (1), 77–105. Graff-Zivin, J. and M. Neidell (2014). Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for climate change.

Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1), 1–26. Hertzel, M. G., Z. Li, M. S. Officer, and K. J. Rodgers (2008). Inter-firm linkages and the wealth effects of financial distress along the supply chain. Journal of Financial Economics 87 (2), 374–387. Hong, H., F. W. Li, and J. Xu (2019). Climate risks and market efficiency. Journal of Econometrics 208 (1), 265 – 281. Special Issue on Financial Engineering and Risk Management. IPCC (2013). Summary for policymakers.

In T. Stocker, D. Qin, G. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. Midgley (Eds. ), Climate change 2013: the physical science basis, contribution of working group I to the 5th assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Krüger, P., Z. Sautner, and L. T. Starks (2018). The importance of climate risks for institutional investors. Working Paper, Swiss Finance Institute.

Kumar, A., W. Xin, and C. Zhang (2019). Climate sensitivity and predictable returns. Working Paper, Available at SSRN 3331872. Lesk, C., P. Rowhani, and N. Ramankutty (2016). Influence of extreme weather disasters on global crop production. Nature 529 (7584), 84. Lin, C., T. Schmid, and M. S. Weisbach (2018). Price risk, production flexibility, and liquidity management: Evidence from electricity generating firms. National Bureau of Economic Research. Mishra, A. K. and V. P. Singh (2010).

A review of drought concepts. Journal of Hydrology 391 (1-2), 202–216. National Weather Service (2019). Heat - a weather hazard of summer. Available at: https://www.weather. gov/btv/heat_awareness. Noy, I. (2009). The macroeconomic consequences of disasters. Journal of Development Economics 88 (2), 221–231. Pankratz, N., R. Bauer, and J. Derwall (2019). Climate change, firm performance, and investor surprises. Working Paper, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA). Pechan, A. and K. Eisenack (2014).

The impact of heat waves on electricity spot markets. Energy Economics 43, 63–71. PWC (2015). CEO pulse on climate change. Available at: http://download.pwc.com/gx/ceo-pulse/ climatechange/index.htm. Schlenker, W. and C. A. Taylor (2019). Market expectations about climate change. Working Paper 25554, National Bureau of Economic Research. 31 Seetharam, I. (2018). The indirect effects of hurricanes: Evidence from firm internal networks. Working Paper, Stanford University.

Sepannen, O., W. Fisk, and Q. H. Lei (2006). Effect of temperature on task performance in office environment. Working Paper, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Somanathan, E., R. Somanathan, A. Sudarshan, and M. Tewari (2015). The impact of temperature on productivity and labor supply: Evidence from indian manufacturing. Working Paper, Indian Statistical Institute. Strömberg, D. (2007). Natural disasters, economic development, and humanitarian aid. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 199–222.

Xiang, J., P. Bi, D. Pisaniello, and A. Hansen (2014). Health impacts of workplace heat exposure: an epidemiological review. Industrial Health 52 (2), 91–101. Zhang, P., O. Deschenes, K. Meng, and J. Zhang (2018). Temperature effects on productivity and factor reallocation: Evidence from a half million chinese manufacturing plants. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 88, 1–17.

32 Tables and Figures Figure 1: This figure illustrates the geographical distribution of the customers in our sample. Supply-chain relationships and firm locations are obtained from FactSet Revere and FactSet Fundamentals, respectively. The corresponding Table 1 reports the number of customers by regions of the world. 33 Figure 2: This figure illustrates the geographical distribution of the suppliers in our sample.

Supplychain relationships and firm locations are obtained from FactSet Revere and FactSet Fundamentals, respectively. The corresponding Table 1 reports the number of customers by regions of the world.

34 Climate Shocks Expected Climate Exposure Realized Climate Exposure 3 2 1 t -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 climate shocks/year = 1 2 3 4 5 climate shocks/year > 1 Start Supply-Chain Relationship Figure 3: This figure illustrates the construction of 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t), an indicator variable capturing the discrepancy between realized and expected climate risk based on the exposure of a hypothetical supplier to climate shocks over time.

It is constructed by first estimating the expected number of climate shocks per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of five (in robustness tests seven, ten, and fifteen) years before the establishment a given supplier-customer relationship.

1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t) then takes the value of one in year t if the difference between the realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of shocks (illustrated in red), and zero otherwise (illustrated in green).

35 Climate Shocks, Replaced Supplier 3 2 1 Climate Shocks, Replacment Supplier 3 2 1 1984 ... 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 ... t 2017 estimation period 1984 − 2017 estimation period during Supply-Chain Rel. Start estimation period af ter Supply-Chain Rel. End Figure 4: This figure illustrates the construction of the comparison of the climate exposure of replaced and replacement suppliers, based on an example of a hypothetical replaced supplier and the replacement.

We compare the climate exposure of old and new suppliers based on three time periods. First, we compute the exposure to climate shocks for actual and replacement suppliers throughout the whole sample period from 1984 to 2017. Second, we estimate and compare the climate shock exposure of the replaced and replacement supplier based on the years (illustrated in dark grey) during which the initial supply-chain relationship was active.

Third, we compare the exposure of both suppliers during the years (illustrated in light grey) after the initial supplier has been replaced. 36 Table 1: Sample Composition Notes. This table shows the industry and geographic distribution of customers and suppliers in our sample.

We retain supplier and customer firms from the FactSet Revere universe of supply chain relationships if more than 50% of their assets are in their home country and at least one complete record of financial performance data and climate hazard records is available during the period from 2000 to 2017. We drop firms that operate in the financial industry (one-digit SIC code of 6). The number of observations refers to firms. Customers Suppliers No.

% 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 460 863 1,147 721 646 518 195 18 10.1 18.9 25.1 15.8 14.1 11.3 4.3 0.4 Total 4,568 100.0 SIC Code Customers % 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 482 803 1,226 637 313 606 212 10 11.2 18.7 28.6 14.9 7.3 14.1 4.9 0.2 Total 4,289 100.0 Suppliers No. % East Asia & Pacific Europe & Central Asia Latin America & Caribbean Middle East & North Africa North America South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa 1,397 838 183 135 1,852 99 54 30.6 18.4 4.0 3.0 40.6 2.2 1.2 Total 4,558 100.0 Region No. SIC Code No.

% East Asia & Pacific Europe & Central Asia Latin America & Caribbean Middle East & North Africa North America South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa 1,457 775 135 96 1,756 27 36 34.0 18.1 3.2 2.2 41.0 0.6 0.8 Total 4,282 100.0 Region 37 Table 2a: Summary Statistics – Firm and Relationship Characteristics Notes.

This table presents summary statistics of the financial performance of the customer firms (Panel A) and supplier firms (Panel B) in our sample, as well as the characteristics of the customer-supplier pairs (Panel C). The sample period is 2000 to 2017 and the number of observations refers to firm-quarters (pair year) in Panel A and B (Panel C).

The percentage of assets, price-book ratio, and debt-asset ratio are obtained from Factset, and total assets, revenues and operating income over total assets are from Compustat Global and Compustat North America. The sample excludes firms with less than 50% of their assets in their home country, observations with missing records on revenue and/or operating income, missing lagged climate exposure records, as well as records of firms that operate in the financial industry (one-digit SIC code of 6).

Panel A: Customers Variables Pct. Assets Home Country Price-Book Ratio Debt-Assets Ratio Total Assets mUSD Revenue/Assets (Quarter) Op.

Income/Assets (Quarter) N Mean SD p25 p50 p75 93,076.000 77,938.000 81,532.000 93,076.000 93,076.000 93,076.000 88.825 4.386 25.921 6,353.646 23.988 2.474 12,374.838 69.987 58.712 22,195.190 17.143 2.941 77.018 1.245 7.998 381.761 11.630 1.214 95.888 1.991 23.106 1,296.504 19.914 2.565 100.000 3.318 37.155 4,250.391 32.019 3.959 N Mean SD p25 p50 p75 86,615.000 72,695.000 75,939.000 86,615.000 86,615.000 86,615.000 88.338 3.749 23.447 5,096.686 21.958 1.932 17.919 20.676 24.425 21,595.702 15.482 3.653 78.192 1.258 4.898 194.664 10.871 0.781 96.616 2.025 20.115 690.095 18.769 2.310 100.000 3.368 35.377 2,612.214 29.542 3.758 N Mean SD p25 p50 p75 2,439 1,848 25,954 25,954 25,954 25,954 25,954 17.873 1.815 342.489 1.336 1.022 4,043.456 13.828 17.363 5.085 1,036.583 1.437 1.584 3,894.813 10.612 8.667 0.058 4.908 0.542 0.429 699.792 8.000 13.000 0.274 29.036 0.902 0.917 2,593.262 12.000 20.400 1.171 172.786 1.522 1.566 6,904.968 16.000 Panel B: Suppliers Variables Pct.

Assets Home Country Price-Book Ratio Debt-Assets Ratio Total Assets mUSD Revenue/Assets (Quarter) Op. Income/Assets (Quarter) Panel C: Customer-Supplier Pairs Variables Suppl. Sales/Total Suppl. Sales Suppl. Sales/Cust. Cost Goods Sold Customer/Supplier Assets Customer/Supplier Sales Customer/Supplier Op. Income Distance Customer-Supplier (km) Customer-Supplier Active (Quarters) 38 Table 2b: Summary Statistics – Climate Exposure Notes.

This Table presents summary statistics of the climate exposure measures of the customers (Panel A) and suppliers (Panel B) in our sample. The sample period is 2000 to 2017 and the number of observations refers to firm-quarters. We apply similar data filters as in Table 2a. The variables heatwave days, flood days, and flood deaths are constructed conditional on the respective occurrence of a heatwave of flood incident, lowering the respective number of observations.

Heatwave occurrence and characteristics are constructed using daily temperature data from the ERA-Interim database of the European Center for Medium-term Weather Forecasts, flood-related variables are obtained from the Darthmouth Flood Observatory, and EM-DAT indicators are from the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT) provided by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED).

Panel A: Customers Variables Heatwave in Financial Quarter Number Heatwaves in Financial Quarter Heatwave Days Average Temperature Flood in Financial Quarter Number Floods in Financial Quarter Flood Deaths EM-DAT Flood EM-DAT Heatwave N Mean SD p25 p50 p75 93,076.000 93,076.000 28,041.000 93,076.000 93,076.000 93,076.000 5,774.000 93,076.000 93,076.000 0.301 0.534 23.881 18.843 0.062 0.082 29.338 0.503 0.054 0.459 0.918 26.243 8.920 0.241 0.347 147.970 0.500 0.226 0.000 0.000 7.000 11.468 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 16.000 20.379 0.000 0.000 4.000 1.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 32.000 26.426 0.000 0.000 18.000 1.000 0.000 N Mean SD p25 p50 p75 86,615.000 86,615.000 32,315.000 86,615.000 86,615.000 86,615.000 5,476.000 86,615.000 86,615.000 0.373 0.676 24.499 18.723 0.063 0.084 33.801 0.511 0.055 0.484 0.996 25.613 8.797 0.243 0.351 166.491 0.500 0.228 0.000 0.000 7.000 11.370 0.000 0.000 1.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 17.000 20.204 0.000 0.000 5.000 1.000 0.000 1.000 1.000 33.000 26.177 0.000 0.000 22.000 1.000 0.000 Panel B: Suppliers Variables Heatwave in Financial Quarter Number Heatwaves in Financial Quarter Heatwave Days Average Temperature Flood in Financial Quarter Number Floods in Financial Quarter Flood Deaths EM-DAT Flood EM-DAT Heatwave 39 Table 3: Climate Shocks and Supplier Firm Performance Notes.

This Table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of climate shocks in the location of the sample supplier firms on their revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets. Heatwave (t) and F lood (t) are dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a climate shock in quarter t, respectively. Panel A shows the results for contemporaneous climate shocks observed during financial quarter t, Panel B includes three additional climate lags.

The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2000 to 2017. We apply similar data filters as in Table 2a. All regressions include firm-by-quarter fixed effects to control for time invariant firm characteristics and firm-specific seasonal effects, and industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects.

Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A Heatwave (t) Flood (t) Observations R-squared Firm-Qtr FE Ind-Year-Qtr FE BS2016 FE Sup Rev (t) Dependent Variable: Sup OpI (t) Sup Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) 0.03166 (0.1065) 0.02241 (0.1071) -0.01930 (0.0360) -0.01513 (0.0363) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Sup OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.18854* (0.1112) -0.15404 (0.1111) -0.09460*** (0.0361) -0.09774*** (0.0364) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Panel B Sup Rev (t) Heatwave (t) Heatwave (t-1) Heatwave (t-2) Heatwave (t-3) Flood (t) Dependent Variable: Sup OpI (t) Sup Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.05987 (0.1253) -0.26467** (0.1316) -0.26348** (0.1326) -0.25308** (0.1201) -0.06485 (0.1252) -0.26323** (0.1298) -0.23965* (0.1311) -0.23141* (0.1186) -0.04328 (0.0393) -0.01000 (0.0428) -0.13313*** (0.0402) -0.10326*** (0.0388) -0.03768 (0.0398) -0.00882 (0.0431) -0.12375*** (0.0405) -0.09929** (0.0391) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Flood (t-1) Flood (t-2) Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Firm-Qtr FE Ind-Year-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 40 Sup OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.26743** (0.1288) -0.25238** (0.1237) -0.29058** (0.1266) -0.07022 (0.1188) -0.22553* (0.1286) -0.21675* (0.1238) -0.28779** (0.1280) -0.04943 (0.1197) -0.11412*** (0.0403) -0.02420 (0.0416) -0.12465*** (0.0414) 0.00359 (0.0376) -0.11614*** (0.0406) -0.02420 (0.0419) -0.11980*** (0.0413) 0.00740 (0.0374) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Table 4: Downstream Propagation of Climate Shocks Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of climate shocks at the supplier location on revenues over assets (Rev) and operating income over assets (OpI) of their respective customers. In Panel A the unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-quarter level. In Panel B we collapse the data at the customer level by aggregating across suppliers.

The climate shock dummy variables take the value of one if at least one supplier has been affected by a heatwave or a flood, respectively. Hence, the number of observations in Panel B refers to customer firm-quarters. The sample period in both panels is from 2003 to 2017. Sup Heatwave (t) and Sup F lood (t) are dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a climate shock at the location of the supplier firm. We apply similar data filters as in Table 3.

All regressions include relationship-by-quarter fixed effects (Panel A) and customer-by-quarter fixed effects (Panel B), respectively, as well as year-by-quarter fixed effects. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Table 3. Standard errors are clustered on the customer-supplier relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Supplier-Customer Pair-Level Cus Rev (t) Sup Heatwave (t) Sup Heatwave (t-1) Sup Heatwave (t-2) Sup Heatwave (t-3) Sup Flood (t) Cus OpI (t) Dependent Variable: Cus Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) 0.02786 (0.0470) -0.01464 (0.0221) -0.03825 (0.0245) -0.02819 (0.0258) 0.02672 (0.0465) -0.01745 (0.0213) -0.04398* (0.0238) -0.02662 (0.0251) -0.01790 (0.0137) -0.00962 (0.0068) -0.00806 (0.0074) -0.00956 (0.0072) -0.01912 (0.0132) -0.00987 (0.0066) -0.00803 (0.0071) -0.00805 (0.0070) 214,302 0.948 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.951 Yes Yes Yes 214,302 0.807 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.820 Yes Yes Yes Sup Flood (t-1) Sup Flood (t-2) Sup Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Relationship-by-Qtr FE Year-by-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 41 Cus OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.08335 (0.0569) -0.11191*** (0.0418) -0.11857*** (0.0416) -0.15530*** (0.0430) -0.06364 (0.0544) -0.09930** (0.0411) -0.12130*** (0.0406) -0.14299*** (0.0418) -0.01944 (0.0161) -0.03034** (0.0122) -0.03792*** (0.0120) -0.03110*** (0.0120) -0.01096 (0.0154) -0.02220* (0.0117) -0.03555*** (0.0115) -0.02366** (0.0117) 214,302 0.948 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.951 Yes Yes Yes 214,302 0.807 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.820 Yes Yes Yes Panel B: Customer Firm-Level Sup Heatwave (t) Sup Heatwave (t-1) Sup Heatwave (t-2) Sup Heatwave (t-3) Sup Flood (t) Cus Rev (t) Dependent Variable: Cus OpI (t) Cus Rev (t) Cus OpI (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.04554 (0.1113) -0.12701 (0.0836) -0.05269 (0.0748) -0.05443 (0.0784) -0.02099 (0.1114) -0.10292 (0.0838) -0.06724 (0.0747) -0.04173 (0.0785) -0.03659 (0.0294) -0.05150** (0.0258) 0.00114 (0.0258) -0.00864 (0.0251) -0.02541 (0.0290) -0.03996 (0.0259) 0.00398 (0.0258) -0.00528 (0.0251) 44,566 0.888 Yes Yes No 44,565 0.891 Yes Yes Yes 44,566 0.671 Yes Yes No 44,565 0.679 Yes Yes Yes Sup Flood (t-1) Sup Flood (t-2) Sup Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Firm-by-Qtr FE Year-by-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 42 (5) (6) (7) (8) 0.02105 (0.0892) -0.10328 (0.0818) -0.15035* (0.0786) -0.07456 (0.0857) 0.03538 (0.0889) -0.09463 (0.0816) -0.16157** (0.0781) -0.08922 (0.0874) 0.00680 (0.0250) -0.05304** (0.0248) -0.03007 (0.0243) 0.00754 (0.0258) 0.02062 (0.0255) -0.04528* (0.0247) -0.03828 (0.0240) 0.00636 (0.0255) 44,566 0.888 Yes Yes No 44,565 0.891 Yes Yes Yes 44,566 0.671 Yes Yes No 44,565 0.679 Yes Yes Yes Table 5: Downstream Propagation – Placebo Tests Notes.

This table presents the results of placebo tests on the impact of climate shocks at the supplier location on customer revenues over assets (Rev) and operating income over assets (OpI). We construct the placebo sample by restricting the observations to real customer-supplier pairs during periods in which the relationship was not yet or no longer active. We apply similar data filters as in Table 4.

Heatwave (t) and F lood (t) are dummies indicating the occurrence of a climate shock in period t. In Panel A, the number of observations refers to supplier-customer pair-quarters. In Panel B, we collapse the data in a similar way as in Panel B of Table 4. The sample period in both panels is from 2003 to 2017. All regressions include relationship-by-quarter fixed effects (Panel A) and customer-by-quarter fixed effects (Panel B), respectively, as well as year-by-quarter fixed effects.

Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Table 4. Standard errors are clustered on the customer-supplier relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Supplier-Customer Pair Level Sup Heatwave (t) Sup Heatwave (t-1) Sup Heatwave (t-2) Sup Heatwave (t-3) Sup Flood (t) Cus Rev (t) Dependent Variable: Cus OpI (t) Cus Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.02492 (0.0395) 0.02350 (0.0200) 0.03437* (0.0189) 0.01116 (0.0204) -0.02748 (0.0383) 0.01697 (0.0196) 0.02456 (0.0185) 0.00337 (0.0199) -0.01388 (0.0105) 0.00199 (0.0055) 0.00914* (0.0054) 0.00062 (0.0053) -0.00968 (0.0099) 0.00006 (0.0054) 0.00623 (0.0053) -0.00202 (0.0052) 542,962 0.887 Yes Yes No 542,961 0.891 Yes Yes Yes 542,962 0.685 Yes Yes No 542,961 0.703 Yes Yes Yes Sup Flood (t-1) Sup Flood (t-2) Sup Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Relationship-by-Qtr FE Year-by-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 43 Cus OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) 0.07029* (0.0383) -0.00240 (0.0315) 0.01146 (0.0317) 0.01051 (0.0311) 0.05970 (0.0375) -0.01806 (0.0306) 0.01105 (0.0307) 0.00328 (0.0304) 0.01540 (0.0111) 0.01524* (0.0087) 0.01409* (0.0085) 0.00825 (0.0084) 0.01676 (0.0105) 0.01616* (0.0083) 0.01733** (0.0081) 0.00849 (0.0082) 542,962 0.887 Yes Yes No 542,961 0.891 Yes Yes Yes 542,962 0.685 Yes Yes No 542,961 0.703 Yes Yes Yes Panel B: Customer Firm Level Cus Rev (t) Sup Heatwave (t) Sup Heatwave (t-1) Sup Heatwave (t-2) Sup Heatwave (t-3) Sup Flood (t) Dependent Variable: Cus OpI (t) Cus Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.11981 (0.0882) 0.15363** (0.0743) 0.01662 (0.0727) -0.02077 (0.0739) -0.11738 (0.0878) 0.16255** (0.0745) 0.03214 (0.0729) -0.00569 (0.0741) -0.02767 (0.0267) 0.00044 (0.0234) 0.01570 (0.0226) 0.04261** (0.0216) -0.02955 (0.0265) -0.00175 (0.0234) 0.01661 (0.0229) 0.04308** (0.0215) 0.10892 Sup Flood (t-1) Sup Flood (t-2) Sup Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Firm-by-Qtr FE Year-by-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 77,342 0.839 Yes Yes No 77,339 0.842 Yes Yes Yes 77,342 0.587 Yes Yes No 77,339 0.596 Yes Yes Yes 44 Cus OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) 0.08744 (0.0740) 0.13973* (0.0784) 0.00940 (0.0733) 0.08090 (0.0718) 0.01090 (0.0747) 0.12288 (0.0782) 0.00138 (0.0731) 0.07144 (0.0718) 0.00010 (0.0217) 0.06497*** (0.0203) 0.03121 (0.0219) 0.02089 (0.0211) (0.0217) 0.06359*** (0.0202) 0.02713 (0.0219) 0.01358 (0.0212) 77,342 0.839 Yes Yes No 77,339 0.842 Yes Yes Yes 77,342 0.587 Yes Yes No 77,339 0.596 Yes Yes Yes Table 6: Expected vs.

Realized Climate Risk and Relationship Termination Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact of realized vs. expected supplier-firm climate shocks on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. Panel A reports the results for heatwaves, Panel B reports the results for flooding incidents.

The unit of observation in all regressions is at the supplier-customer pair-year level, the dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. The regressions include only pair-years in which the relationship was active. Our main variable of interest is the indicator variable 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t), capturing the deviation of realized from expected supplier climate.

It is constructed by first estimating the expected number of climate shocks per year in the supplier location over a benchmark period of five years before the establishment a given supplier-customer relationship. 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t) then takes the value of one in year t if the difference between the realized number of climate shocks per year since the beginning of the supplier-customer relationship exceeds the corresponding expected number of shocks, and zero otherwise.

We exclude customers headquartered within a 500 kilometer radius of the supplier and apply similar data filters as in Table 4. The regressions include relationship fixed effects, year fixed effects, supplier-industry-by-year, supplier-country-by-year, and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Heatwaves Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) (2) (3) (4) 1 (Realized > Expected Heatwaves) (t) 0.02320*** (0.0022) 0.02309*** (0.0023) 0.01422*** (0.0023) 0.01045*** (0.0023) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE 299,718 0.353 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.378 Yes Yes Yes No No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.415 Yes Yes No No Yes Panel B: Flooding Incidents Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) (2) (3) (4) 1 (Realized > Expected F loods) (t) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE 0.04707*** (0.0021) 0.04770*** (0.0022) 0.03982*** (0.0022) 0.03681*** (0.0022) 299,718 0.354 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.379 Yes Yes Yes No No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.416 Yes Yes No No Yes 45 Table 7: Robustness – Realized Climate Risk and Relationship Termination Notes.

This table presents linear probability model estimates on the of realized supplier-firm climate shocks on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. Panel A reports the results for heatwaves, Panel B reports the results for flooding incidents. Heatwave (t) and F lood (t) are dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a climate shock in the location of the supplier firm in year t, respectively. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer-year level.

We include only active supply-chain relationship years. The dependent variable takes the value of one if a given supplier-customer relationship ends after the current year t, and zero otherwise. Similar to Table 6, we exclude all customers located within 500 kilometers of their supplier and apply similar data filters as in Table 6.

The regressions include relationship fixed effects, year fixed effects, supplier-industry-by-year, supplier-country-by-year, and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated. Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Heatwaves (1) Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (2) (3) (4) Heatwave (t) 0.00118 (0.0008) 0.00104 (0.0008) 0.00171** (0.0008) 0.00160** (0.0008) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE 299,718 0.353 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.378 Yes Yes Yes No No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.415 Yes Yes No No Yes Panel B: Flood Incidents Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (1) (2) (3) (4) Flood (t) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE 0.00285*** (0.0010) 0.00331*** (0.0010) 0.00106 (0.0010) 0.00010 (0.0010) 299,718 0.353 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.378 Yes Yes Yes No No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.415 Yes Yes No No Yes 46 Table 8: Climate Change Risk and Supplier Substitution Notes.

This table reports the difference in climate change exposure between terminated suppliers and their subsequent replacements. To construct the sample for this table, we match each supplier firm for which the supplier-customer relationship is terminated during the sample period (“old suppliers”) (as reported in Table 6) with their replacements (“new suppliers”).

Replacement suppliers are identified as those firms with identical 4-digit SIC codes as the “old suppliers”, which enter a new supply-chain relationship with a given customer within two years of the previous supply-chain relationship termination. Panel A shows the comparison for heatwave exposure, Panel B shows the results for flood exposure.

The first line in each panel compares the number of climate shocks over the period from 1984 to 2017, the second line compares the exposure during the period in which the “old” supply-chain relationship was active, and the third line refers to the time period after the “old” relationship is abandoned. t-statistics are reported in brackets. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 5%, 1% and 0.1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Heatwaves (1) New vs. Old Heatwaves 1984-2017 Heatwaves during Terminated Supply Chain Relationship Heatwaves after Termination of the Original Supply Chain Relationship -5.239∗∗∗ -0.829∗∗∗ -2.065∗∗∗ Observations [-17.569] [-17.993] [-22.606] 100,172 Panel B: Flood Incidents (1) New vs. Old Floods 1984-2017 Floods During Terminated Supply Chain Relationship Floods After Termination of the Original Supply Chain Relationship Observations -0.000 -0.031∗∗∗ -0.333∗∗∗ [-0.008] [-4.182] [-23.340] 100,172 47 A Appendix Table A1: Robustness – Climate Shocks and Supplier Firm Performance Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of climate shocks in the location of the sample supplier firms on their revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets. Heatwaves (t) and F loods (t) are continuous variables measuring the total number (count) of climate shocks in the supplier’s location in quarter t. Panel A shows the results for contemporaneous climate shocks observed during financial quarter t, Panel B includes three additional climate lags.

The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2000 to 2017. We apply similar data filters as in Table 2a. All regressions include firm-by-quarter fixed effects to control for time invariant firm characteristics and firm-specific seasonal effects, and industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects.

Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Sup Rev (t) Heatwaves Heatwaves (t-1) Heatwaves (t-2) Heatwaves (t-3) Floods Dependent Variable: Sup OpI (t) Sup Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.00036 (0.0621) -0.09555 (0.0696) -0.14765** (0.0715) -0.20294*** (0.0660) 0.00942 (0.0624) -0.09363 (0.0686) -0.14069** (0.0709) -0.18615*** (0.0659) 0.00884 (0.0190) -0.00385 (0.0209) -0.06833*** (0.0207) -0.05274** (0.0206) 0.00969 (0.0192) -0.00613 (0.0211) -0.06902*** (0.0208) -0.05239** (0.0207) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Floods (t-1) Floods (t-2) Floods (t-3) Observations R-squared Firm-Qtr FE Ind-Year-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 48 Sup OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.22041** (0.0885) -0.17513* (0.0924) -0.18122** (0.0912) -0.06639 (0.0853) -0.19408** (0.0887) -0.15295* (0.0922) -0.18212** (0.0923) -0.05708 (0.0860) -0.09581*** (0.0283) -0.02764 (0.0286) -0.07107** (0.0297) -0.01064 (0.0272) -0.09614*** (0.0287) -0.02481 (0.0288) -0.06623** (0.0296) -0.00673 (0.0271) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Table A2: Robustness – EM-DAT Climate Shocks and Supplier Performance Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of climate shocks in the location of the sample supplier firms on supplier firm revenues (Rev) and operating income (OpI), both scaled by assets. EM − DAT Heatwave (t) and EM − DAT F lood(t) are dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a climate shock in the supplier’s location in quarter t based on the EM-DAT international disaster database.

The number of observations refers to supplier firm-quarters, and the sample period is 2003 to 2017. We apply similar data filters as in Table 2a. All regressions include firm-by-quarter fixed effects to control for time invariant firm characteristics and firmspecific seasonal effects, and industry-by-year-by-quarter fixed effects.

Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include interaction terms of terciles of firm size, age, and ROA with year-by-quarter fixed effects to control for firm characteristics (BS2016 FE), following Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016). Standard errors are clustered on the firm level. ∗ ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Sup Rev (t) EM-DAT Heatwave (t) EM-DAT Heatwave (t-1) EM-DAT Heatwave (t-2) EM-DAT Heatwave (t-3) EM-DAT Flood (t) Dependent Variable: Sup OpI (t) Sup Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.05013 (0.1862) -0.34675** (0.1511) 0.07203 (0.1546) 0.16453 (0.1547) -0.22382 (0.1977) -0.38940** (0.1602) -0.01361 (0.1579) 0.02850 (0.1603) 0.04729 (0.0556) -0.12494*** (0.0483) 0.07404 (0.0559) 0.07788 (0.0569) 0.02408 (0.0669) -0.15618*** (0.0560) 0.07325 (0.0603) 0.06295 (0.0601) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes EM-DAT Flood (t-1) EM-DAT Flood (t-2) EM-DAT Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Firm-Qtr FE Ind-Yr-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 49 Sup OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.03392 (0.0755) -0.04415 (0.0822) -0.03657 (0.0759) -0.07892 (0.0703) -0.00332 (0.0797) 0.02797 (0.0836) 0.01128 (0.0787) -0.02729 (0.0725) 0.00581 (0.0268) 0.06244** (0.0303) 0.04908 (0.0300) 0.02255 (0.0264) 0.00484 (0.0285) 0.06291* (0.0323) 0.05400* (0.0319) 0.02113 (0.0286) 86,615 0.887 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.889 Yes Yes Yes 86,615 0.740 Yes Yes No 86,615 0.741 Yes Yes Yes Table A3: Robustness – Downstream Propagation of Climate Shocks Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of climate shocks at the supplier location on revenues over assets (Rev) and operating income over assets (OpI) of their respective customers. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-quarter level and the sample period is from 2003 to 2017.

Sup Heatwaves (t) and Sup F loods (t) are continuous variables measuring the total number (count) of climate shocks in the supplier’s location in quarter t. We apply similar data filters as in Table 4. All regressions include relationship-by-quarter fixed effects as well as year-by-quarter fixed effects. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Table 4.

Standard errors are clustered on the customer-supplier relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Cus Rev (t) Sup Heatwaves (t) Sup Heatwaves (t-1) Sup Heatwaves (t-2) Sup Heatwaves (t-3) Sup Floods (t) Cus OpI (t) Dependent Variable: Cus Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) 0.02938 (0.0257) 0.00610 (0.0120) 0.00525 (0.0123) 0.00787 (0.0129) 0.03503 (0.0250) 0.00773 (0.0117) 0.00278 (0.0119) 0.01075 (0.0126) -0.01539** (0.0072) -0.00487 (0.0033) -0.00061 (0.0035) -0.00344 (0.0033) -0.01081 (0.0069) -0.00314 (0.0031) -0.00052 (0.0034) -0.00183 (0.0032) 214,302 0.948 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.951 Yes Yes Yes 214,302 0.807 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.820 Yes Yes Yes Sup Floods (t-1) Sup Floods (t-2) Sup Floods (t-3) Observations R-squared Relationship-by-Qtr FE Yr-by-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 50 Cus OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) -0.11948*** (0.0451) -0.13504*** (0.0323) -0.15698*** (0.0318) -0.15580*** (0.0321) -0.10698** (0.0424) -0.13094*** (0.0315) -0.15939*** (0.0307) -0.14692*** (0.0315) -0.03053** (0.0123) -0.03392*** (0.0094) -0.03760*** (0.0083) -0.02846*** (0.0083) -0.02331** (0.0115) -0.02911*** (0.0088) -0.03565*** (0.0079) -0.02304*** (0.0080) 214,302 0.948 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.951 Yes Yes Yes 214,302 0.807 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.820 Yes Yes Yes Table A4: Robustness – Downstream Propagation of EM-DAT Climate Shocks Notes.

This table presents OLS regression estimates on the impact of climate shocks at the supplier location on revenues over assets (Rev) and operating income over assets (OpI) of their respective customers. The unit of observation is at the supplier-customer pair-quarter level and the sample period is from 2003 to 2017.

EM − DAT Heatwave (t) and EM − DAT F lood (t) are dummy variables indicating the occurrence of a climate shock in the supplier’s location in quarter t based on the EM-DAT international disaster database. We apply similar data filters as in Table 4. All regressions include relationship-by-quarter fixed effects as well as year-by-quarter fixed effects.

Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) additionally include terciles of size, age, and ROA interacted with year-by-quarter fixed effects (BS2016 FE) as in Table 4. Standard errors are clustered on the customer-supplier relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Cus Rev (t) EM-DAT Heatwave (t) EM-DAT Heatwave (t-1) EM-DAT Heatwave (t-2) EM-DAT Heatwave (t-3) EM-DAT Flood (t) Dependent Variable: Cus OpI (t) Cus Rev (t) (1) (2) (3) (4) -0.07784 (0.0831) 0.08667* (0.0497) -0.11003** (0.0502) -0.04647 (0.0521) -0.09911 (0.0820) 0.06417 (0.0486) -0.10010** (0.0499) -0.04014 (0.0516) 0.04383* (0.0264) 0.00409 (0.0155) -0.01911 (0.0153) 0.01404 (0.0168) 0.04897** (0.0245) 0.00762 (0.0149) -0.01421 (0.0148) 0.01114 (0.0163) 214,302 0.948 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.951 Yes Yes Yes 214,302 0.807 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.820 Yes Yes Yes EM-DAT Flood (t-1) EM-DAT Flood (t-2) EM-DAT Flood (t-3) Observations R-squared Relationship-by-Qtr FE Year-by-Qtr FE BS2016 FE 51 Cus OpI (t) (5) (6) (7) (8) 0.06421 (0.0408) 0.02745 (0.0225) 0.01866 (0.0235) 0.04297* (0.0227) 0.04346 (0.0406) 0.01803 (0.0222) 0.01528 (0.0228) 0.05178** (0.0229) 0.02854** (0.0117) -0.00236 (0.0070) 0.01159* (0.0068) -0.00326 (0.0067) 0.02195** (0.0112) -0.00463 (0.0068) 0.01082 (0.0066) -0.00228 (0.0063) 214,302 0.948 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.951 Yes Yes Yes 214,302 0.807 Yes Yes No 214,302 0.820 Yes Yes Yes Table A5: Robustness – Expected vs.

Realized Climate Risk Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact of realized vs. expected supplierfirm climate shocks on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination. The sample and variables are constructed similarly as in Table 6.

In Panels A, B, and C we use benchmark periods of seven, ten, and fifteen years before the establishment of a supply-chain relationship to construct our main variables of interest, 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t), as illustrated in Figure 3. We apply similar data filters as in Table 6. The regressions include relationship fixed effects, year fixed effects, supplier-industry-by-year, supplier-country-by-year, and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated.

Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: 7-year benchmark period 1 (Realized > Expected Heatwaves) (t) 1 (Realized > Expected F loods) (t) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (3) (4) (5) (6) (1) (2) 0.01340*** (0.0021) 0.01259*** (0.0021) 0.00744*** (0.0022) 0.00564*** (0.0022) 299,718 0.353 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.378 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.415 Yes Yes No No Yes (1) (2) 0.01452*** (0.0021) 0.01203*** (0.0021) 0.00671*** (0.0021) 0.00662*** (0.0021) 299,718 0.353 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.378 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.415 Yes Yes No No Yes (1) (2) 0.01984*** (0.0021) 0.01691*** (0.0021) 0.01286*** (0.0022) 0.01414*** (0.0022) 299,718 0.353 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.378 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 297,998 0.413 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.415 Yes Yes No No Yes (7) (8) 0.07069*** (0.0022) 0.07149*** (0.0022) 0.06483*** (0.0023) 0.06027*** (0.0023) 299,718 0.356 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.381 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 297,998 0.415 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.417 Yes Yes No No Yes (7) (8) Panel B: 10-year benchmark period 1 (Realized > Expected Heatwaves) (t) 1 (Realized > Expected F loods) (t) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (3) (4) (5) (6) 0.07492*** (0.0022) 0.07381*** (0.0022) 0.07195*** (0.0023) 0.06895*** (0.0023) 299,718 0.356 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.381 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 297,998 0.415 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.417 Yes Yes No No Yes (7) (8) Panel C: 15-year benchmark period 1 (Realized > Expected Heatwaves) (t) 1 (Realized > Expected F loods) (t) Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE Sup-Industry-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Yr FE Sup-Country-by-Cus-Country-by-Yr FE Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (3) (4) (5) (6) 52 0.06034*** (0.0022) 0.05982*** (0.0022) 0.05815*** (0.0023) 0.05595*** (0.0023) 299,718 0.355 Yes Yes No No No 298,053 0.380 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 297,998 0.414 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 294,330 0.416 Yes Yes No No Yes Table A6: Robustness – Expected vs.

Realized Climate Risk with Control Variables Notes. This table presents linear probability model estimates on the impact of realized vs. expected supplier-firm climate shocks on the likelihood of supply-chain relationship termination, controlling for supplier and customer firm characteristics. The sample and variables are constructed similarly as in Table 6.

In Panels A, B, and C we use benchmark periods of seven, ten, and fifteen years before the establishment of a supply-chain relationship to construct our main variables of interest, 1 (Realized > Expected Climate Shocks) (t), as illustrated in Figure 3. We apply similar data filters as in Table 6. The regressions include relationship fixed effects, year fixed effects, supplier-industry-by-year, supplier-country-by-year, and supplier-country-by-customer-country-by-year fixed effects as indicated.

Robust standard errors are clustered on the relationship level. ∗ , ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: 7-year benchmark period 1 (Realized > Expected Heatwaves) (t) 1 (Realized > Expected F loods) (t) Debt-Assets Ratio Supplier Debt-Assets Ratio Customer Price-Book Ratio Customer Price-Book Ratio Supplier Ln(MV Equity) Supplier Ln(MV Equity) Customer Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE SupIndustry-Yr FE SupCountry-Yr FE SupCountry-CusCountry-Yr FE Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (3) (4) (5) (6) (1) (2) 0.01306*** (0.0032) 0.01154*** (0.0033) 0.00614* (0.0034) 0.00612* (0.0034) -0.00035** (0.0001) 0.00014 (0.0002) -0.02256*** (0.0034) -0.00089 (0.0032) -0.02108*** (0.0028) -0.00093 (0.0017) -0.00056*** (0.0001) 0.00004 (0.0002) -0.01471*** (0.0034) 0.00790** (0.0033) -0.02462*** (0.0029) -0.00032 (0.0016) -0.00004 (0.0001) 0.00001 (0.0002) -0.01023*** (0.0033) 0.00863*** (0.0033) -0.01757*** (0.0029) 0.00018 (0.0016) 137,239 0.373 Yes Yes No No No 137,171 0.400 Yes Yes No No No 137,099 0.435 Yes Yes Yes Yes No (1) (2) 0.01727*** (0.0032) 0.01362*** (0.0032) 0.00728** (0.0033) 0.00907*** (0.0033) -0.00034** (0.0001) 0.00014 (0.0002) -0.02254*** (0.0034) -0.00078 (0.0032) -0.02105*** (0.0028) -0.00093 (0.0017) -0.00055*** (0.0001) 0.00005 (0.0002) -0.01470*** (0.0034) 0.00796** (0.0033) -0.02456*** (0.0029) -0.00032 (0.0016) -0.00004 (0.0001) 0.00001 (0.0002) -0.01022*** (0.0033) 0.00866*** (0.0033) -0.01754*** (0.0029) 0.00018 (0.0016) 137,239 0.373 Yes Yes No No No 137,171 0.400 Yes Yes No No No 137,099 0.435 Yes Yes Yes Yes No (7) (8) 0.00017 (0.0001) 0.00037* (0.0002) -0.01515*** (0.0035) 0.00066 (0.0032) -0.01110*** (0.0029) -0.00039 (0.0017) 0.06411*** (0.0035) -0.00035** (0.0001) 0.00012 (0.0002) -0.02205*** (0.0034) -0.00089 (0.0032) -0.02106*** (0.0028) -0.00106 (0.0017) 0.06738*** (0.0035) -0.00055*** (0.0001) 0.00002 (0.0002) -0.01425*** (0.0034) 0.00783** (0.0033) -0.02457*** (0.0029) -0.00043 (0.0016) 0.06050*** (0.0036) -0.00005 (0.0001) -0.00001 (0.0002) -0.00990*** (0.0033) 0.00882*** (0.0032) -0.01739*** (0.0029) 0.00008 (0.0016) 0.05226*** (0.0036) 0.00016 (0.0001) 0.00035* (0.0002) -0.01517*** (0.0035) 0.00080 (0.0032) -0.01097*** (0.0029) -0.00051 (0.0017) 133,519 0.439 Yes Yes No No Yes 137,239 0.375 Yes Yes No No No 137,171 0.403 Yes Yes No No No 137,099 0.436 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 133,519 0.440 Yes Yes No No Yes (7) (8) Panel B: 10-year benchmark period 1 (Realized > Expected Heatwaves) (t) 1 (Realized > Expected F loods) (t) Debt-Assets Ratio Supplier Debt-Assets Ratio Customer Price-Book Ratio Customer Price-Book Ratio Supplier Ln(MV Equity) Supplier Ln(MV Equity) Customer Observations R-squared Relationship FE Yr FE SupIndustry-Yr FE SupCountry-Yr FE SupCountry-CusCountry-Yr FE Dependent Variable: Last Relationship Year (0/1) (3) (4) (5) (6) 53 0.00017 (0.0001) 0.00037* (0.0002) -0.01514*** (0.0035) 0.00069 (0.0032) -0.01112*** (0.0029) -0.00038 (0.0017) 0.06559*** (0.0035) -0.00035** (0.0001) 0.00011 (0.0002) -0.02211*** (0.0034) -0.00082 (0.0032) -0.02068*** (0.0028) -0.00114 (0.0017) 0.06581*** (0.0035) -0.00056*** (0.0001) 0.00001 (0.0002) -0.01438*** (0.0034) 0.00800** (0.0033) -0.02420*** (0.0029) -0.00051 (0.0016) 0.06344*** (0.0037) -0.00005 (0.0001) -0.00001 (0.0002) -0.01001*** (0.0033) 0.00896*** (0.0032) -0.01710*** (0.0029) -0.00000 (0.0016) 0.05770*** (0.0037) 0.00016 (0.0001) 0.00034* (0.0002) -0.01527*** (0.0035) 0.00095 (0.0032) -0.01070*** (0.0029) -0.00059 (0.0017) 133,519 0.439 Yes Yes No No Yes 137,239 0.375 Yes Yes No No No 137,171 0.402 Yes Yes No No No 137,099 0.436 Yes Yes Yes Yes No 133,519 0.440 Yes Yes No No Yes

Heriot-Watt University Research Gateway Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance Citation for published version: Er-Kara, M, Ghadge, A & Bititci, US 2021, 'Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance', International Journal of Production Research, vol. 59, no. 24, pp.

7317-7335. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1849844 Digital Object Identifier (DOI): 10.1080/00207543.2020.1849844 Link: Link to publication record in Heriot-Watt Research Portal Document Version: Peer reviewed version Published In: International Journal of Production Research Publisher Rights Statement: This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in International Journal of Production Research on 2/12/2020, available online: http://www.tandfonline.com/10.1080/00207543.2020.1849844 General rights Copyright for the publications made accessible via Heriot-Watt Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

Take down policy Heriot-Watt University has made every reasonable effort to ensure that the content in Heriot-Watt Research Portal complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please contact open.access@hw.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim. Download date: 11. Dec. 2024 Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance Abstract Climate change is among the top global risks due to its growing adverse impact on businesses. However, few empirical studies address this imminent risk from a supply chain perspective.

Due to a lack of established approaches for capturing complex interaction between climate change risk and supply chain performance, a three-phase mixed methodology approach was attempted. A cognitive map first captured the inter-relationships based on a mental model established by a group of experts. Later, a survey gathered from industry practitioners assessing causal relationships identified key climate change factors and most influenced supply chain performance dimensions.

Finally, a system dynamics model supported by multiple case scenarios assessed the implications of climate change on supply chain performance. The results indicated a significant reduction in the availability of natural resources/raw material and capacity, leading to increase in stock-outs, inventory costs and bottlenecks disrupting procurement, manufacturing and logistics functions.

Supply chain performance captured through efficiency and effectiveness shows a negative trend with increasing climate change consequences. The systems approach followed in this paper contributes by providing a quantitative model for assessing the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance. Keywords: Supply chain performance, Climate change, Performance measurement, Climate risk, Uncertainty, Systems theory 1.

Introduction Climate change is an inevitable risk faced by today’s supply chains. Climate change and supply chains are found to mutually influence each other through natural disasters and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, respectively (Ghadge et al., 2020). Recent literature on supply chain management attempts to capture the impact of SC operations on climate change (e.g., Sousa Jabbour et al., 2018; Dahlmann and Roehrich, 2019). However, climate change also affects SC operations in multiple ways.

Various industries such as agriculture, forestry and mining are exposed to the direct and indirect impact of climate change (Sussman and Freed, 2008; Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Gasbarro et al., 2017). Overconsumption of these natural resources has led to the escalation of climate change.

This exogenous risk can significantly impact organisation’s operational and financial performance (Agrawala et al., 2011; Bergmann et al., 2016; Lim-Camacho et al., 2017). Existing climate models indicate that climate change and its cascading effects will continue to impact global supply chains in the future (OECD, 2015, Andreoni and Miola, 2014; Li et al., 2019). Thus, organisations should work together to develop climate resilient Supply Chain (SC) networks.

To build such capability within SCs, comprehensive understanding of mutually-influencing relationship and their impact is essential. Climate change impacts various entities and functional levels in supply chains, and their ripple effect leads to risk propagation along the entire SC network (Ghadge et al., 2020). However, investigation of the implications of climate change from SC perspective is limited and in its early stages (Fleming et al., 2014; Alves et al., 2017; Lim-Camacho et al., 2017).

Despite few conceptual or theoretical developments, there is an evident lack of empirical/analytical studies attempting to capture the holistic interaction between climaterelated risks and SC operations (Ghadge et al., 2020). In general, studies attempting to quantify the impact of climate change are inadequate due to the high inherent uncertainty of the topic, lack of suitable data, and complexity in modelling an uncertain problem (Andreoni and Miola, 2014; Melkonyan et al., 2017).

The motivation behind this study is the lack of holistic analytical modelling approaches to develop climate change scenarios at the SC level, earlier identified by Ghadge et al. (2020). According to Alves et al. (2017), controlling and monitoring climate contingencies at the SC level should be permanent and systematic. This requires developing a thorough understanding of the direct and immediate impact of climate change as well as long-term, cascading effects resulting from the climate variability.

Analysing these changes on SC performance indicators is a good starting point to measure and assess these direct and cascading effects. Thus, this study aims to quantify the impact of climate change risk on SC performance. In order to achieve this aim, the study models the aggregated impact of this risk on identified SC performance metrics as well as overall SC efficiency and effectiveness.

Due to a lack of established approaches for capturing complex interaction between climate change risk and supply chain performance, a three-phase mixed methodology approach was attempted. First, cognitive mapping was used to provide a graphical representation of expert(s) mental model concerning the relations between climate change and business Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. operations. Consequently, a survey was developed to gather information about the most influencing variables interfacing between climate change and SC operations from an industry practitioners’ perspective. The prominent relations identified from the above methods were modelled and simulated using System Dynamics (SD) approach.

Multiple case scenarios with different risk exposure levels were assessed to gain insights into the behaviour of supply chains under different climate change scenarios. The paper contributes to climate change risk research within the SC context in two ways. First, the proposed cognitive map captures the complex interaction between two domains from the climate change perspective. Past studies have looked at this from the SC perspective.

Secondly, to the best of authors’ knowledge this is the first comprehensive study attempting to quantify the aggregated impact of climate change risk on overall SC performance, efficiency and effectiveness. The rest of the paper is presented as provided. Section 2 provides critical literature associated with the impact of climate change on business operations and supply chain performance measurement. The mixed-methodology approach is presented in section 3.

Section 4 explains the three phases of the study, from holistic cognitive mapping to the specified quantitative analysis. Section 5 summarises the results and findings of the developed SD model. Finally, discussion, theoretical implications and future research directions are presented. 2. Literature review 2.1.

Impact of climate change on business operations Climate-related risks are increasingly threatening the sustainability and competitiveness of organisations and their wider networks (Fleming et al., 2014; Bergmann et al., 2016; Gasbarro et al., 2017). It is well known that climate change leads to rising temperatures, changes in seasons, sea-level rise, unusual weather events and natural disasters.

These events may directly or indirectly affect multiple entities within SC networks such as physical infrastructure and assets (e.g., factory, warehouse, energy infrastructure, transportation network), natural resources (e.g., land, water and energy resources, crops, livestock) and workforce (OECD, 2015). To comprehend all possible impact of climate change on business operations, an extensive review of literature was conducted.

Table 1 captures a wide range of adverse effects Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. of climate change on the performance and competitiveness of organizations.

Captured implications from multiple sources (cited in Table 1) range from decreased availability and quality of resources, decreased labour productivity, decline in revenue and profit, increased effort and costs due to new regulations, increased insurance costs and changes in energy demand for cooling and heating.

Undoubtedly, climate change risk is of growing interest to business/SC researchers as well as practitioners due to the increased frequency, severity and duration of extreme weather events (e.g., heatwaves, floods, storms, and droughts) (OECD, 2015; Bergmann et al., 2016; Ghadge et al., 2020). Extreme events driven by climate change are found to damage facilities, physical assets, transportation and energy infrastructure and communication systems as evidenced from the literature (Table 1).

There have been few developments on building conceptual or theoretical underpinning. Bergmann et al. (2016) employ comparative analysis to investigate the impact of five types of extreme weather events (heatwave, cold wave, heavy precipitation, storm and drought) on the financial performance of organisations based on natural resource dependence theory. Following contingency theory, Alves et al.

(2017) list four contingencies arising from climate change that affect supply chains as: resource scarcity and difficulty of access to raw materials, technological advances, new regulations, and extra costs. Ghadge et al. (2020) emphasise the importance of risk management to cope with climate change following systems theory to propose a conceptual framework for managing climate change risks in supply chains.

Despite these sporadic conceptual or theoretical developments on climate change in SC context, there is an evident lack of empirical/analytical studies that reveal the holistic interaction between climate-related risks and SC performance. Notably, there is an apparent need to quantify various impacts of climate change on different stages of SCs and provide a clear picture of this uncertain and multi-faceted interaction. 2.2.

Supply chain performance measurement Performance measurement is the process of developing a set of performance metrics and collecting, analysing, reporting and reviewing performance data to quantify the effectiveness and efficiency of organisations' processes (Bititci, 2015; Bourne et al., 2018). Effectiveness indicates the level to which the customer's requirements are met; whereas efficiency refers to how economically the resources are deployed to fulfil customer orders (Neely et al., 1995).

Performance measurement helps to ascertain that an organisation effectively reveals whether processes are under control and whether improvements are required (Akyuz and Erkan, 2010). Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Table 1.

Challenges faced by businesses due to broad climate change issues Challenges faced by businesses due to Description of issues broad climate change issues Supply problems of raw material • Scarcity of agricultural products due to difficulty to grow crops under resources changing weather conditions or infectious plant diseases and pests • Decreased quality of agricultural and forestry raw materials due to diseases or • Extinction or scarcity of some extreme weather events such as flood resources • Water scarcity, lower crop yields and decreased livestock production due to • Difficulty to access to raw materials meteorological, hydrological and agricultural droughts • Decreases in the quality and quantity • Deforestation due to global warming of raw materials • Land use changes • Higher raw material and commodity prices • Crop diseases, pests, animal infections Changes in customer behaviour and • Demand volatility (e.g., increase in demand of some products and services demand such as beverages, air conditioners, renewable energy, tourism; decrease in demand of electricity, residential heating, etc.)

• Changes in market (e.g., increase in demand of environmentally-friendly products due to environmental awareness) Relocation of production • The necessity to relocate facilities to resilient geographical regions Changes in the efficiency and • Increased temperatures may affect the performance of processes and quality effectiveness of processes of outcomes References Sussman and Freed, 2008; Thorpe and Fennell, 2012; Alves et al., 2017 Agrawala et al., 2011; Keleş et al., 2018 Andreoni and Miola, 2014 Sussman and Freed, 2008 Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted.

Changes in product quality Decrease in labour performance Damage or destruction of facilities, infrastructure and physical assets Transportation problems Destruction of markets Extra costs • Decreased product quality resulting from low quality raw materials affected by climate change (e.g., decrease in coffee quality due to low-quality beans resulting from changing seasons) Kreie, 2013 • The effects of climate related events (e.g., heat stress) on the productivity of the workforce especially in farming and construction industries Sussman and Freed, 2008; OECD, 2015 • Damage to facilities, transportation infrastructure, energy networks and communication systems resulting from extreme weather events such as floods, storm, etc.

• Damage to transportation infrastructure and problems in delivery of products and services Crawford and Seidel, 2013 • Disruption of transportation infrastructure because of climate changerelated disasters • Delays in delivery of products due to bad weather conditions or weather extremes Agrawala et al., 2011 • Human migration due to climate change • Loss of customer base as a result of climate change-related disasters Sussman and Freed, 2008; OECD, 2015 • Higher prices due to scarcity of resources • Costs to control growing crop diseases and pests • Regulation taxes, tariffs and levy rates • Increased costs due to environmental regulations (e.g., cost of low-carbon technologies) • Increased energy usage and/or costs Thorpe and Fennell, 2012; Agrawala et al., 2011; Fleming et al., 2014; Sussman and Freed, 2008; Alves et al., 2017 Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted.

• Higher insurance and maintenance costs • Cost of development and adoption of new technologies and innovative solutions (refrigerated transportation and storage systems, climate resilient buildings, temperature regulation technologies in plants, floating agriculture, laser land levelling in agriculture, integration of real time monitoring of weather data & early warning systems for extreme events, etc.)

Climate related mortality and morbidity Decreased financial performance Changes in regulations Damage to reputation of the company Changes in energy consumption • High temperatures may cause health problems and death of employee and IPCC, 2014; OECD, 2015 customers • Exposure to extreme heat and cold may decrease the performance of employee • Spread of infectious diseases • Decrease in profits and income due to increased commodity prices and Crawford and Seidel, 2013 operation costs • Stricter environmental regulations (e.g., GHG reduction) • Disaster management regulations Agrawala et al., 2011 • Decrease in customer satisfaction due to lower quality levels or delays in Agrawala et al., 2011 delivery of products due to other effects of climate change • Changes in energy demand for cooling and heating process, transportation, Sussman and Freed, 2008; OECD, 2015 storage and office environments Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Performance measurement and management systems provide a wide range of advantages such as increased performance and competitive advantage, improved visibility on processes, standard framework for communication, tracking and documentation of performance among others (Bourne et al., 2000; Bititci et al., 2016).

Multiple performance indicators have been proposed and used both in the academic literature and industry. Gunasekaran and Kobu (2007), conducting a literature review on the performance measures in logistics and SC management, identify 27 key metrics for organisations.

Some of these financial and nonfinancial metrics are as follows: return on investment, forecasting accuracy, labour efficiency, capacity utilisation, production flexibility, lead time, delivery reliability, value-added, perceived quality, etc. Various performance measurement models and frameworks have also been developed in the literature; e.g., balanced scorecard and supply chain operations reference (SCOR) model (Akyuz and Erkan, 2010; Bititci, 2015).

Due to criticism of incomplete and incoherent performance metrics, the SCOR model was developed by the Supply Chain Council (SCC, 2012). The SCOR model provides a framework to describe and analyse all business processes in a standardised way across multiple industries.

It provides a set of indicators to measure, monitor and benchmark the performance of specific process or the overall SC, based on five main performance attributes: reliability, responsiveness, agility, costs, and asset management (Sellitto et al., 2015). A myriad of macro and micro risks affect the inputs, processes and outputs of organizations, damaging overall SC performance (Quang and Hara, 2018; Turken et al., 2020; González-Zapatero et al., 2020).

However, there is a lack of conceptual models linking SC risk management and performance management domains. 3. Research methodology This study uses a mixed methods approach to investigate the cascading effects of climate change risk on the performance of supply chains. As the research is trying to understand uncertain interactions between climate change and supply chains, a systems theory was identified to be suitable.

Systems theory suggests that all phenomena can be viewed as a ‘web of relationships' that have common patterns, behaviours, and properties like a ‘system' ( Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Sterman, 2000).

The SD approach follows systems theory to model and simulate cause and effect relationships (Forrester, 1994; Sterman, 2000) and is found to be ideal for the nature of study undertaken here. Following a mixed methodology approach, the study was conducted in three phases: • Phase 1: A cognitive mapping approach utilised to present a holistic picture of interrelationships between climate change and SC performance management.

Brainstorming sessions with subject experts were used to develop a mental model. • Phase 2: A survey study to investigate awareness, perception, evaluations and experiences of 62 managers from different industries was used to determine the most prominent risks based on practitioner’s point of view.

• Phase 3: Development of a SD model to quantitatively analyse the impact of identified climate change factors on different SC indicators as well as overall SC efficiency and effectiveness following hypothetical case scenarios. The three structured approaches guide towards achieving defined aim of the research. In the first phase, expert opinions were used to develop a cognitive map capturing interrelationships between the consequences of climate change and SC performance dimensions.

The literature review on the impact of climate change on SC performance showed that climate change affects several entities and operations via myriad factors (Table 1). Unfortunately, there is no established methodology to apprehend these ambiguous interactions. Thus, we followed the cognitive mapping approach to capture complex interactions between different (internal and external) climate change factors and SC performance metrics.

‘Cognitive map’ is a visual representation of a mental model developed by an individual or group of experts for a given system capturing variables, entities and causal relationships based on available knowledge (Mital et al., 2018). Cognitive mapping has several advantages, such as the ability to model relationships that are very complex and not known with certainty; thus, providing the ability to combine expert knowledge and available information (Özesmi and Özesmi, 2004).

As observed in this cognitive map (Figure 1), several climate change factors influence SC performance indicators in multiple ways. Since it is not possible to model all climate change-related events/risks and their impact on SC performance dimensions during SD modelling, a second phase was introduced to carefully select only key climate-driven risks and Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. SC performance indicators.

A survey-based study engaged with 62 managers to identify following: • Impacted SC functions from the overall climate change threat • Key climate change factors that impact SC operations • Identification of critical SC performance dimensions capturing this impact In the third phase, an SD model was developed to simulate and quantify the risk impacts on different SC performance indicators as well as overall SC efficiency and effectiveness.

The SD approach is based on systems theory and allows to analyse the dynamic behaviour of complex systems over time (Campuzano and Mula, 2011; Ghadge et al., 2013). The ‘systems approach’ is beneficial to model causal relationships and dependencies in order to simulate the overall system interaction (Bala et al., 2017). It is also used to identify policies or examine the effectiveness of decisions following simulation of the system.

It is widely used for risk assessment comprising of different scenarios, due to its capability to simulate complex interactions and ability to perform sensitivity analysis (Li et al., 2016; Mehrjoo and Pasek, 2016; Olivares-Aguila and ElMaraghy, 2020). SD methodology follows logical modelling approach. First a causal loop diagram (CLD) is developed. CLD is a visual representation of the variables, links among variables, signs of the links and the feedback loops in a problem system.

Next, stock-and-flow diagram capturing input, output and rate values are identified from the CLD. Mathematical equations and values are defined for input/output variables in this stage. After verification and validation of equations in the stock-and-flow diagram, the model is prepared for the simulation run with pre-defined input parameters (Rathore et al., 2020; Olivares-Aguila and ElMaraghy, 2020).

A traditional three-echelon SC network was modelled by considering material, cash and information flow under uncertain climatic conditions. As a part of the SD modelling approach, first, a causal loop diagram was drawn by incorporating the most prominent links between climate change-related risks and SC performance indicators, as revealed from the survey.

After understanding the basic structural behaviour of the system, a stock and flow diagram was developed to model and analyse this problem in detail. A set of equations was assigned to describe these relationships. Model parameters and equations (Appendix A & B) were identified based on expert knowledge, authors’ experience and several logical assumptions due to lack of available and reliable historical data related to the impact of climate change on SC operations.

The developed SD model was run to simulate nine case scenarios Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. representing three different risk exposure and vulnerability levels (high, moderate, low) for sourcing, manufacturing and delivery functions. The simulation model was developed and run in Vensim©- a commercial, discrete-event simulation platform. 4. Analysis 4.1.

Towards understanding the impact of climate change on supply chain performance The cognitive map shown in Figure 1 was developed based on two brainstorming sessions with subject experts to capture the links between climate change factors and SC performance.

Five subject experts with academic background in supply chain risk management (2), performance measurement (1), climate change (1) and business management (1) identified potential interactions between climate change factors and key SC performance indicators during the first brainstorming session.

In the second session, each expert developed their mental model and later discussed with other experts; before finalising the cognitive map capturing several interrelationships between climate change factors and SC performance holistically, as shown in Figure 1. Multiple influential variables from both domains were identified based the number of arrows directed to and from a variable capturing centrality/inter-dependence.

+ material Raw cost Disruption of SC facilities + + + - - Sea level rise + Ocean warming + Order fulfillment lead time - Inventory holding + cost Quality of resources Floods + ++-++Revenue/ Drougths profit Global + Precipitation Labour -warming effectiveness + - Delivery + + -+ Wildfires performance + -+ Water + + + Natural resources Heatwaves Productivity Total resources cycle time + -- + + + + Climate Availability + Capacity change of resources Demand Forecasting Storm + utilization + + + Hurricanes variability accuracy + + + Manufacturing + Land-use and operations Schedule deforestation + Consumption of + - variance + natural resources Environmental Reliability GHG emissions + -+ regulations and produced by firms Transportation+ + policies Energy + + + +activities consumption Customer + - Environmental satisfaction pollution + + Supplier + + Order performance + fulfillment + rate Geographical +changes Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Figure 1. Cognitive map for the interaction between climate change and SC performance As observed in Figure 1, climate change leads to several environmental consequences including global warming and extreme weather events such as storms, hurricanes, etc.

Especially, global warming affects a huge number of variables in the system; e.g., natural resources, heatwaves, sea level rise, precipitation and wildfire. These consequences may also impact and trigger other climate change risks via inherent complex relationships within the system. All of these consequences directly or indirectly affect different performance dimensions of SCs.

As an example, global warming leads to an increase in ocean temperature, thus contributing to the melting of ice and the rising of sea levels. Climate change also disrupts the availability of natural resources via changes in precipitation level, droughts, and extreme weather events. Many resource-dependent industries are directly influenced by the scarcity and decreasing quality of raw materials.

Changes in weather conditions, geographical changes and natural disasters caused by climate change may also lead to disruption in SC facilities, changes in labour effectiveness, variability in demand and decreases in delivery performance. These problems and increasing costs in supply chains proliferate along the network, leading to a decrease in productivity, profits and lead times and hence, order fulfilment.

The unexpected ways in which climate change affects both the environment and organisational conditions lead to problems in planning and forecasting reliability. Figure 1 also captures the impact of industrial activities on climate change. Manufacturing operations require consumption of energy and natural resources, which may result in environmental degradation, loss of resource bases and GHG emissions.

Both manufacturing operations and transportation activities are influenced by environmental pollution and changes in land use. Therefore, SC operations also contribute to the growth of existing climate change issues. Thus, environmental regulations and policies were incorporated for reducing the amount of waste and GHG emissions produced by SCs. 4.2.

Defining the boundaries of the model The cognitive map in the previous section provided a general picture of the SCs under influence of climate change factors. However, it is not possible to model all effects in a unique quantitative model. Therefore, a questionnaire was designed to identify the most prominent variables interlinking climate change and SC performance dimensions from an SC manager’s perspective.

To collect the survey data, first, introductory information was provided to respondents about the aim of the research. Survey questions focused on evaluation of the Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. criticality of different climate change factors and exposure of different SC functions to these risks.

The survey designed in the Qualtrics survey platform was shared with over 240 contacts in industry. Email and other social media platforms such as LinkedIn and Twitter were used to obtain responses. 62 responses (26% response rate) were collected over five months (JanuaryMay 2019) from managers from multiple industries (e.g., food, textile, automotive, electronics, logistics, pharmaceutical, construction, machinery and energy).

Targeted survey respondents were not limited to a specific industry, with a view of providing a general overview of climate change in the business world. Of the respondents, half were senior managers (i.e., directors and executives); 37% and 13% were at mid-level and junior managers, respectively. Average work experience of respondents was around 12 years.

The 62 responses were checked for nonresponse bias by comparing early and late responses to reveal significant differences, if any (Armstrong and Overton, 1997; Blome et al., 2014). All the responses were divided into two groups based on their time of return and t-test was performed on two groups. The results of the two-samples revealed no statistically significant difference (t=13.52, p>0.05) for all three aspects for which data was collected.

The difference between the two groups for the categories was at the 5% level. Thus, the sample was not found to have response bias and was used for the next level of analysis. Unsurprisingly, 87% of the respondents stated that climate change is a significant risk for their SC/business, which indicates a high awareness of the climate change threat in industry.

Respondents who did not think climate change poses a severe risk to their business were from the automotive, electronics and machinery industries. First, the respondents were asked to assess different climate change consequences based on the effect to their business based on a five-point scale (Don’t know, No impact, Low impact, Moderate impact, High impact).

Figure 2 shows the percentage of respondents providing the highest score for the negative effects of climate change factors on the overall performance of their SC network. Based on the responses, extreme weather events, temperature increase, deforestation and decrease in available land were selected as the primary external factors for the SD modelling. Changes in seasons was not included as temperature increase variability will indirectly include this effect.

Detailed examination of the responses also revealed that, due to the direct and indirect relations between different climate change factors, the awareness and visibility of these links and their ripple effects are relatively low; e.g., differences between respondents' individual answers on rising Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted.

sea levels versus warmer oceans, and water resource problems versus deforestation due to high interaction between them. Increase in extreme weather events Temperature increase Changes in seasons Defor. and decr. in available land Emergence/ changes in regulations Water resource problems Human health impacts Extinction of plant and animal spec. Rising sea levels Warmer oceans 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% Figure 2.

Response for most influential climate change factors Secondly, respondents were asked to evaluate the climate change exposure level on ten SC/business functions. Figure 3 represents highly influenced SC functions. Supply, delivery, planning and forecasting, inventory management and manufacturing are the highest impacted functions due to climate change. Activities associated with planning and forecasting and inventory management overlap with supply and manufacturing function.

Therefore, supply, manufacturing and delivery were selected as SC functions that would be most exposed to the negative effects of climate change driven-risks. Supply Delivery Planning and forecasting Inventory management Manufacturing Warehousing Demand management Finance and commercial ops. Research & Development Marketing 0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% Figure 3. Response for most impacted SC functions due to climate change 80% Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Respondents were also asked to assess the impact of each climate change factor/consequence on a more detailed set of performance dimensions.

These performance dimensions namely, demand variability, availability of resources, raw material quality, raw material price, productivity, manufacturing lead time, manufacturing cost, product quality, warehousing/inventory holding cost, delivery lead time, delivery cost, maintenance cost, energy consumption and disruptions of SC facilities were identified. These results were complementary to most impacted SC functions as well as established SC performance measurement matrices.

Survey results indicated that extreme weather events and temperature increase impact through non-availability and accessibility of resources, increase in raw material prices and disruptions to transportation routes, further cascading into reduced overall efficiency of SC operations. 4.3. Developing system dynamics model The aim of this section is to develop the SD model of a three-echelon SC under the impact of critical climate change factors.

Causal loop diagram Only the most prominent climate change factors and most vulnerable operations to climate change threat were identified for the development of the causal-loop model. Following the survey results, extreme weather events and temperature increase were identified as the major external factors for the SD model.

These factors directly impact the availability of natural resources (e.g., crops, plants and animal species, water, fossil fuel reserves) due to decreased availability of land; further impacting the availability of raw materials in many natural resource-dependent industries.

Secondly, the impact of extreme weather conditions on delivery performance was represented in two ways: decreased delivery speed and blockage of transportation routes due to extreme/adverse weather events (e.g., storms, snowfall). The causal loop diagram shown in Figure 4 represents the critical interactions between selected climate change factors and SC dynamics. Arrows represent the causal links between different elements of the system ("+": positive, "–": negative relationships).

As seen from Figure 4, climate change is an external factor of the system, and its consequences directly or indirectly affect several SC performance measures such as availability of raw materials, productivity, delivery performance, order-fulfilment rate and customer satisfaction. Besides the impact of climate change on physical flows in SC networks, Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. it also leads to some economic impact for SC stakeholders.

The proposed model considers two types of costs that are impacted by the climate change; increasing raw material price due to growing resource scarcity problems and additional logistics costs because of delivery delays and blockage of transportation routes (e.g., higher carrying cost due to higher lead time, inventory holding cost during blockage).

Efficiency and effectiveness dimensions are incorporated into the model to understand and evaluate the performance implications of climate change risk in SCs.

+ Climate change + Temperature increase Blockage of transportation route Delivery speed + - Environmental availability of raw materials + - + Decrease in available land - + Order fullfilment rate Customer demand + + + - SC Effectiveness Manufacturing amount + + Manufacturing productivity Desired + production rate Raw material price Bad weather conditions and extreme weather events Delays in delivery + Overall SC performance + + SC + Efficiency - + Inventory holding cost ++ Logistics cost Customer + satisfaction + Total SC cost + Figure 4.

Causal loop diagram for the SD model Stock and flow diagram The developed causal loop diagram was later converted into a stock and flow diagram with multiple stock, flow and auxiliary variables. Figure 5 represents the stock and flow diagram of a three-echelon SC, including supply (sourcing/procurement) and manufacturing as key subsystems and delivery functions linked with the movement of goods between them.

The objective of developing a stock and flow model was to assess changes in SC dynamics under varying climate change conditions. Here, input and output variables of the system were defined based on insights generated from the causal loop diagram. For more information regarding converting the causal loop diagram to a stock and flow diagram for obtaining simulation results in the SD, please refer to Forrester (1994) or Sterman (2000). Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. The SD model consisting of a stock and flow diagram was based on a continuous material flow throughout a three-echelon network. Due to lack of real-time data for simulation, hypothetical data with several parameter values and assumptions were considered.

The quantity of monthly customer demand was assumed to be normally distributed with a mean of 1000 and a standard deviation of 100. The model was designed such that, if the finished goods inventory is not sufficient to fulfil a customer order, the manufacturer will face stock-out issues. Initial inventory levels at supplier and manufacturer were set at 1200 to provide a steady state beginning for the simulation run.

Different scenarios were developed by varying climate change related disruption levels. Availability of raw materials, transportation blockage and bad weather-related delays were specified as random variables. Distribution parameters (e.g. mean, standard deviation, min, max) and parameter trend changes at different time steps were identified based on the characteristic of the scenario type.

Since SD is a behaviour-oriented simulation approach, input values and input distributions require domain knowledge and experience (Ghadge et al., 2013). Hence, the parameter space was explored based on multiple runs with stochastic parameters.

Parameter values and relative influence of each parameter on simulation behaviour were discussed with two industry practitioners to qualify the best numerical values for low (optimistic), moderate and high (pessimistic) conditions by referencing real world experiences and foresight. Other model parameters such as standard delivery time were determined by consulting experts about the most likely value.

Appendix A and B provides detailed information on key variables, simulation parameters and scenario parameters used in this study. Capturing impact of climate change risk effects on availability of raw materials and supply rate Availability of resources is affected by disruption and found to be exponentially decreasing due to cascading impact (Ivanov et al., 2014; Ojha et al., 2018). Availability of raw materials was calculated with Equation (1). !

"#$%#&$%$'( *+ ,#- .#'/,$#%0 = 23$'$#% #"#$%#&%/ ,/0*4,5/ "#%4/ ∗ / ! "#$%&'() "+&$,-( (..("- ∗ -&$( (1) Initial value of available resources was set at 1500 units (150% of mean demand). Combined climate effect showed that the level of climate change exposure is a function of the following variables: extreme weather events, temperature increase and decrease in available land. The value of these three variables was determined by assigning a severity value between 1 and 9.

These variables have a different level of impact on the availability of resources. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted.

Unit cost change Raw material price Availability of raw materials Manufacturing cost Combined climate effect Supplier's Inventory Temperature increase Supply rate Overhead absorbtion rate Extreme weather events1 <Climate change> Mean blockage time Supplier shipment rate Manuf Inventory Desired production rate Safety stock Extreme weather events2 Severity of weather extreme SD of blockage time Bad weather probability Decrease in delivery speed Customer demand SC Effectiveness Product delivery rate Deviation in lead time Desired shipment rate Stockout amount Delays in delivery Delivery lead time Lead time adjustment SD of Mean bad severity weather level Weather related delay Transportation blockage Blockage length Overall SC performance Manufacturing productivity change Production rate + Decrease in available land SC efficiency Blockage start Figure 5.

Stock and flow diagram of a supply chain under climate change Additional transportation cost Additional inventory holding cost Increase in logistics cost Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Thus, different weights were assigned to each of these factors as 0.3, 0.5 and 0.2, respectively.

The combined climate effect variable was calculated by multiplying the weighted total with an adjustment coefficient to represent the real behaviour of the system following expert opinion (by examining what will happen under similar conditions in the real life). Raw material price was also set as a function of the availability of resources and the combined climate change impact (initial value=7.5 $/unit).

Capturing impact of weather conditions on logistics The initial value of the delivery lead time was set to seven days. Shipment of finished goods to customers may be delayed due to changes in weather patterns and extreme weather events in terms of increased lead time or may cause blockage of transportation infrastructure for a period. A lead time adjustment variable was added to represent these effects.

Occurrence start time and severity of a possible transportation route blockage and weather-related delays were modelled as random variables. Mean, standard deviation and max distribution values were adjusted based on the state of climate change risk. In case of a route blockage or decrease in delivery speed (e.g. in case of heavy rain or storm), the additional time taken was addressed as a delay. Table 2.

Summary of scenarios Scenarios Effect of climate change on the supply chain Availability of raw materials Low S1L1 ✓ S1L2 ✓ S1L3 ✓ Moderate High Logistics operations Low Moderate High ✓ ✓ ✓ S2L1 ✓ S2L2 ✓ S2L3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ S3L1 ✓ S3L2 ✓ S3L3 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ The model included several performance indicators to analyse the behaviour of SC dynamics under varying climate change conditions, e.g., manufacturing productivity change, stock out amount, delays in delivery (logistics).

Overall, system performance was calculated Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. based on the efficiency and effectiveness of the SC. SC efficiency was defined as a change function of unit cost and manufacturing productivity. SC effectiveness was calculated by stockout amount, deviation in lead time and delays in delivery.

An empirical input validation process was performed to check how well the developed model corresponds to the reality (Rand and Rust, 2011). All key parameters were calibrated via running the model for different input values and analysing the behaviour of different system parameters with the help of SD expert and industry practitioners. Extreme values were tested to make sure the developed SD model works as expected.

Finally, the model was accepted as representative of a traditional real-world SC network following the results of experiments conducted. Availability of raw materials during supply and manufacturing activities was found to be a major bottleneck for the SC system identified earlier. Similar significant impact of climate change was observed on the logistical disruptions.

For developing case scenarios presented in Table 2, this information was utilised along with considering three layers of severity (Low30%, Moderate-60% & High-90%). For example, the S1L2 disruption scenario represents the low availability of raw materials with a moderate level of logistical operations for climate change uncertainty.

The physical meaning of this scenario is that there is only 30% availability of raw materials at the supplier/manufacturer, along with 60% available capacity of logistics. The simulation model was run for a 40-year horizon, as the accuracy of the predictions will be inaccurate beyond this time interval due to high uncertainty concerning climate change. 5. Simulation and findings By simulating the developed SD model, the following results were obtained.

Figure 6(a) shows the expected decrease in availability of raw materials due to the combined impact of climate change risk on natural resources and associated ecosystems for three groups of scenarios. An adjustment coefficient that was included in the combined climate effect formulation was varied to develop three scenario groups with different severity levels as low, moderate and high.

The percentage decreases in the availability of raw materials were observed to be 40%, 53% and 78% for low, moderate and high impact scenarios, respectively. It is evident from Figure 6(a) that, if SCs and governments do not take action to reduce climate change and associated risks, the worst scenario shows that some raw materials (e.g., crops, minerals) may expeditiously decrease and SCs may be obliged to find alternative resources. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. In this study, demand was assumed to be normally distributed. However, when the simulated impact is combined with other external factors such as growing global population and use of natural resources, the uncontrolled effects of climate change will be much more intense for agriculture, forestry, mining and bioenergy sectors. (a) (b) Figure 6.

Changes in available resources and raw material price due to combined climate change impact Problems associated with the availability and accessibility in raw materials were directly reflected in the commodity prices. Figure 6(b) shows an increase in unit raw material price due to supply problems resulting from combined climatic impact. The percentage increases in unit price were approximately 66%, 89%, and 130% for low, moderate and high impact on resources, respectively.

Rising raw material prices and decline in the raw material market size puts pressure on manufacturing costs, productivity, product price and revenue. For perishable/time-sensitive products, the distribution and storage of raw materials should also be considered, as they bear extra cost and energy consumption.

Although this was not considered in the model, with increasing global temperatures, the energy consumption of refrigerator systems in delivery and warehousing is expected to grow exponentially. Figure 7 represents the decrease in production rate and the increasing stock-out amount due to supply problems resulting from the adverse impact of climate change risks. Supply shortages and increases in raw material prices have a significant impact on manufacturing productivity.

Therefore, downward trends in productivity and manufacturing capacity should be assessed along with other economic impacts of climate change. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Figure 7.

Changes in production rate and stock-out amount due to climate change Figure 8 represents delay in delivery as a percentage of standard delivery lead time and increase in total logistics costs as a percentage of initial standard value. These figures were generated based on simulation of bad weather conditions and extreme weather events. As seen in the Figure 8, frequency, severity and duration of both events are observed to be increasing.

All modes of transportation are increasingly affected by adverse weather conditions and extreme weather events based on time, volatility and costs of operations. It is expected that delivery performance and reliability will increase to a critical level within 40 years. This may cause scheduling problems across the whole SC network. Increased lead time and keeping products on hand during transportation blockages bear additional transportation, labour and inventory holding costs.

The effects of disruption may quickly propagate throughout the whole SC network (Ghadge et al., 2012; Scheibe and Blackhurst, 2018; Dolgui et al., 2018; Dolgui et al., 2020); therefore, the proposed SD model considered the impact of various climate change factors on different SC performance indicators. These impacts were combined and examined under two main dimensions - efficiency and effectiveness; as an SC may be ineffective even though they are efficient.

Figures 9 and 10 show the changes in these variables for all the scenarios considered in this study (initial condition=100% for both variables). It was observed that the average decrease in the operational efficiency of the SC was higher than effectiveness in all scenarios. A relatively higher decrease in efficiency (compared to effectiveness) is driven by a significant decrease in resources to fulfil growing SC demand.

Decreases in both SC efficiency and effectiveness leads to a decline in the overall SC performance. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted.

Low-impact on logistics Moderate-impact on logistics High-impact on logistics Delay in delivery for different climate change scenarios (percentage of standard time) Increase in logistics cost for different climate change scenarios (percentage of standard cost) Figure 8. Delays and increase in logistics costs due to changing weather conditions and extreme weather Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. SC Efficiency 100% 97% S1L1 S1L2 94% S1L3 S2L1 91% S2L2 S2L3 S3L1 88% S3L2 S3L3 85% 2019 2025 2031 2037 2043 Year 2049 2055 Figure 9. Changes in SC efficiency for different climate change scenarios Figure 11 shows the box plot for the comparison of nine scenarios based on changes in the overall SC performance.

Especially, the SCs, of which both supply and delivery functions are highly affected and are under severe threat due to climate change. SC performance in Scenario S3L3 decreased to 79% in 40 years. In the best case (Scenario S1L1), the expected performance level was around 92%. SC Effectiveness 100.00% S1L1 S1L2 97.00% S1L3 S2L1 S2L2 94.00% S2L3 S3L1 91.00% S3L2 S3L3 88.00% 85.00% 2019 2025 2031 2037 2043 Year 2049 2055 Figure 10.

Changes in SC effectiveness for different climate change scenarios Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Changes in the overall SC performance 100% 95% 90% 85% 80% 75% Climate change scenarios S1L1 S1L2 S1L3 S2L1 S2L2 S2L3 S3L1 S3L2 Climate change scenarios Figure 11.

Comparison of changes in the overall SC performance under different scenarios The results of the proposed SD simulation model provided a platform for quantifying and understanding interactions between climate change risks and SC performance. 6. Discussion and theoretical implications The developed SD model provides information on the links between climate change-related risks and SC operations. The following prepositions can be put forward for this interaction based on the results of study.

Implications and suggestions are also provided for an effective response under each proposition. Proposition 1: There is a complex and strong interaction between climate change factors and SC performance dimensions. This study empirically reveals a high-level dynamic interaction between climate change factors and SC performance indicators.

Therefore, in our view, these two fields should be assessed together by businesses, governments, agencies and organisations to better manage and respond to disruptions. Practitioners and academics seem more aware of the direct and immediate impact of climate change risk, and indirect impacts are generally neglected: e.g., long-term Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. availability of resources. The proposed systems theory-based approach put forward the multidimensional direct and indirect impact of climate change both in the short- and long-term.

Preposition 2: When the impact of climate change is examined at the SC level, the cascading effect of these risks, along with overall SC performance, efficiency and effectiveness become more apparent. The survey shows that businesses are already feeling the effects of climate change in their operations. However, the propagation of the combined climatic effects along the entire SC remains overlooked.

SC ecosystems are composed of multiple, complex and connected entities, layers and activities, which make these networks inherently vulnerable to the propagative and cascading effects of potential risks (Ghadge et al., 2020). The proposed SD analysis provides insights into how the impacts of different climatic risks on different levels of an SC propagate along the network and how this combined climate change effect is observed on overall SC performance, efficiency and effectiveness.

The results of the model demonstrate the need for substantial intervention for holistic, network-level approaches for climate change risk management systems. It should also be noted that companies may be more susceptible to climate change-related risks via unprepared and weak stakeholders, e.g., suppliers. Notably, global SC networks need to assess geographical disparities in exposure to climate change carefully.

Increased information sharing, visibility, communication and reporting about climate change are some strategies that may increase climate change resilience and adaption capabilities. Proposition 3: There is a remarkable difference among the awareness level (and assessments of climate change risk factors) of managers from different sectors.

Despite there being a common view concerning the growing danger of some climatic risks (e.g., weather extremes), a significant difference is observed among managers' responses on the assessment of the interdependency between particular climate change factors and performance dimensions.

This was an expected case as the target group was not restricted to a specific industry, and the exposure and vulnerability of each organisation is highly dependent on the industrial sector, geographical region and business network structure. Some sectors are inherently more vulnerable to the climate change threat, e.g., agriculture, food and renewable energy. However, the results reveal that climate change risk is ‘highly underrated’, and Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. awareness and visibility regarding the links between climate change factors and their ‘ripple effects’ are generally overlooked. Organisations' business model/strategies and performance management systems should cover climate change threat to survive in today's rapidly changing and volatile climate.

Both climate change science and SC networks inherently cover myriad uncertainties and complex relationships; therefore, there may be sudden and unpredicted changes in the system. Especially, changing patterns of extreme events and natural disasters are increasingly linked to climate change and associated risks. Hence, adaptability and disaster recovery planning are of vital importance while facing climate change risk. 7.

Conclusion Following a systems perspective, this study conceptualised the interaction between climate change risk and SC performance for assessing the impact of one over other. The study consisted of three main phases. First, a group of experts identified potential impacts of climate change on SCs following development of a cognitive map (Figure 1). Later, a survey was applied to a group of practitioners to filter key climate change factors and their impact on major SC performance dimensions.

It was observed that sourcing, manufacturing and logistics are the most vulnerable SC operations to climate change due to the combined impact of temperature increase, decrease in available land and extreme weather events on the availability of raw materials and resource capacity. Following the survey, in the third phase, an SD model was developed to simulate these prominent relations and their impact on overall SC performance, efficiency and effectiveness.

The impact of climate change-driven risks was simulated under three levels (low, moderate, and high) for both the availability of resources and delivery performance, resulting in nine different hypothetical case scenarios. The study quantified the impact of climate change risk on SC performance. Climate change risk has started to transform business; however, academia has lagged behind these developments compared to the industry.

The academic literature is dominated with research on environmentally friendly technologies and risk mitigation strategies; the opposite perspective, the impact of climate change on business, remains highly undervalued and underestimated. Need for empirical research to model, quantify and predict the impact of climate change-driven risks on SCs (Ghadge et al., 2020) was an evident research gap. This Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. study is believed to bridge the gap through the integration of supply chain risk management and performance management concepts. Limited number of studies have focussed on the integration of risk management and performance measurement within supply chain context (e.g. Kache and Seuring, 2014; Chaudhuri et al., 2020).

This study reveals the importance of incorporating risk management into organization’s list of performance measures for effective supply chain management. This helps organizations as well as SCs to be better prepared for uncertain crises or disruptions. This study contributes to the literature in three key dimensions.

First, this study conceptualises and investigates the uncertain interaction between climate change and SC performance based on a review of relevant literature and the development of a cognitive map. The originality of this research resides in bringing together climate change inputs and behaviour of SC dynamics within an SC performance measurement perspective.

The proposed systems approach-based structure offers a deeper understanding and holistic picture of the relationship between climate change factors and SC performance dimensions. Second, it provides an SD-based model to quantify the implications of climate change risk on supply chain performance, efficiency and effectiveness.

Such quantitative analysis facilitates and enhances our knowledge and understanding of the cascading propagation mechanism of climate change risk across supply chain networks. A systems theory approach helps to improve the visibility of climate change-related risks and SD methodology provides a platform to investigate the changes in performance under changing climatic conditions.

Third, although there is a growing awareness of the impact on climate change and global warming on business operations, its generalisability for overall SC performance has not been addressed in the literature. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this study is novel by providing a comprehensive, quantitative, systems theory-based assessment for capturing interrelationship between two key mutually-influencing areas.

The authors expect this article to be a steppingstone for further research and providing a new perspective for performance management in developing climate-smart and adaptable SCs. The study also provides a few propositions and managerial implications. First, insights generated on the most influential climate change factors and most influenced SC functions will help SC managers to better plan for climate change risk management.

Assessment results show the extent of implications on key SC performance matrices. This information is vital for performance measurement and management. Furthermore, 'closed-loop' causal relationship Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. evidenced between climate change and supply chain will encourage practitioners to be more considerate towards the environment.

This systems-theory driven holistic study is expected to encourage SCs/businesses in making proactive investments in order to mitigate climate-change related future disruptions. The study has some limitations. The relationship between climate change and SC performance is multi-fold and covers a wide range of factors that increase the complexity of the problem. Future study can explore this intricate relationship following a micro-level analysis.

It should also be noted that, scientific evidence shows that climate change is accelerating fast; hence, firms must develop robust assessment capabilities to manage this inevitable risk better. Taking a clue from this study, similar empirical and quantitative studies on climate change should be undertaken to develop comprehensive understanding of cascading effect on wider supply chain ecosystem.

Future studies should also focus on developing robust risk mitigation strategies to quickly reduce and possibly overcome the impact of climate risk on global supply chains. Each business within network needs to build resilience to the growing climate change risk and its cascading impact on the wider SC network (Ivanov et al., 2017; Dolgui et al., 2018).

Although the SD model has some limitations and assumptions in terms of the boundaries of the model and included variables; the results of the study are presented by considering the current state of the global markets and different sectoral characteristics to overcome some of these weaknesses. In the simulation model, the scope of climate change impact was limited only to factors and interrelationships identified in the survey.

Another major limitation of the study is the difficulty to gather and utilise historical data on the impact of climate change on SC operations, as quantification of this relationship is complex and equally difficult. Additional data from different sources (e.g. meteorological data) could be used in future studies to better understand the implications of climate risk on supply chain performance.

Despite the above limitations, this study helps to model complicated relationships and thus improve the understanding of the effects of climate change risk on overall SC performance. Acknowledgement: This study was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) under the TUBITAK BIDEB 2219-International Postdoctoral Research Scholarship Programme.

Authors would also like to thank reviewers and special issue guest editor for their constructive recommendations for improving the quality of manuscript. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. References Agrawala, S., Carraro, M., Kingsmill, N., Lanzi, E., Mullan, M., Prudent-Richard, G. 2011.

Private Sector Engagement in Adaptation to Climate Change: Approaches to Managing Climate Risks. OECD Environment Working Papers, No. 39, OECD Publishing. Akyuz, G.A., and Erkan, T.E. 2010. “Supply chain performance measurement: a literature review.” International Journal of Production Research 48 (17): 5137-5155. Alves, M.W.F.M., Jabbour, A.B.L.S., Kannan, D., Jabbour, C.J.C. 2017. “Contingency theory, climate change, and low-carbon operations management."

Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 22 (3): 223-236. Andreoni, V., and Miola, A. 2014. Climate Vulnerability of the Supply-Chain: Literature and Methodological review. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. Armstrong, J.S., Overton, T.S. 1997. “Estimating nonresponse bias in mail surveys.” Journal of marketing research 396-402. Bala, B.K., Arshad, F.M., and Noh, K.M. 2017. System Dynamics: Modelling and Simulation. Springer: Singapore.

Bergmann, A., Stechemesser, K., and Guenther, E. 2016. “Natural resource dependence theory: Impacts of extreme weather events on organizations.” Journal of Business Research 69: 1361–1366. Bititci, U. 2015. Managing Business Performance: The Science and the Art. John Wiley & Sons. Bititci, U., Cocca, P., and Ates, A. 2016. “Impact of visual performance management systems on the performance management practices of organisations.” International Journal of Production Research 54 (6): 1571-1593.

Blome, C., Schoenherr, T., and Eckstein, D. 2014. “The impact of knowledge transfer and complexity on supply chain flexibility: A knowledge-based view.” International Journal of Production Economics 147: 307-316. Bourne, M., Melnyk, S., and Bititci, U. S. 2018. “Performance measurement and management: theory and practice.” International Journal of Operations & Production Management 38 (11): 2010-2021. Bourne, M., Mills, J., Wilcox, M., Neely, A., Platts, K. 2000.

“Designing, implementing and updating performance measurement systems.” International Journal of Operations & Production Management 20 (7): 754-771. Campuzano, F., and Mula, J. 2011. Supply Chain Simulation: A System Dynamics Approach for Improving Performance. Springer-Verlag, London. Chaudhuri, A., Ghadge, A., Gaudenzi, B., Dani, S. 2020. “A conceptual framework for improving effectiveness of risk management in supply networks”. International Journal of Logistics Management, 31 (1): 77-98.

Crawford, M., and Seidel, S. 2013. Weathering the storm: building business resilience to climate change. Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, Arlington. Accessed 30 July 2019. https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/uploads/2013/07/weathering-the-storm-fullreport.pdf Dahlmann, F., and Roehrich, J.K. 2019. “Sustainable supply chain management and partner engagement to manage climate change information.” Business Strategy and the Environment 28 (8): 1632-1647. Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. 2018.

Ripple effect in the supply chain: an analysis and recent literature. International Journal of Production Research 56(1-2): 414-430. Dolgui, A., Ivanov, D. and Rozhkov, M. 2020. “Does the Ripple Effect Influence the Bullwhip Effect? An Integrated Analysis of Structural and Operational Dynamics in the Supply Chain.” International Journal of Production Research 58 (5):1285–1301. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Fleming, A., Hobday, A.J., Farmery, A., van Putten, E.I., Pecl, G.T., Green, B.S., LimCamacho, L. 2014. “Climate change risks and adaptation options across Australian seafood supply chains – A preliminary assessment.” Climate Risk Management 1: 39– 50. Forrester, J. W. 1994.

“System dynamics, systems thinking, and soft OR.” System dynamics review 10 (2‐3): 245-256. Gasbarro, F., Iraldo, F., and Daddi, T. 2017. “The drivers of multinational enterprises' climate change strategies: A quantitative study on climate-related risks and opportunities.” Journal of Cleaner Production 160: 8-26. Ghadge, A., Dani, S. and Kalawsky, R. 2012. Supply chain risk management: present and future scope. International journal of logistics management, 23(3): 313-339.

Ghadge, A., Dani, S., Chester, M., Kalawsky, R. 2013. “A systems approach for modelling supply chain risks.” Supply chain management: an international journal 18(5), 523-538. Ghadge, A., Wurtmann, H., and Seuring, S. 2020. “Managing climate change risks in global supply chains: a review and research agenda.” International Journal of Production Research 58(1): 44-64. González-Zapatero, C., González-Benito, J., Lannelongue, G., Ferreira, L.M. 2020.

“Using fit perspectives to explain supply chain risk management efficacy.” International Journal of Production Research, Online. Gunasekaran, A., and Kobu, B. 2007. “Performance measures and metrics in logistics and supply chain management: a review of recent literature (1995–2004) for research and applications.” International Journal of Production Research 45 (12): 2819-2840. IPCC 2014. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.

Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. Ivanov, D., Sokolov, B., and Dolgui, A. 2014.

“The Ripple effect in supply chains: trade-off ‘efficiency-flexibility-resilience’ in disruption management.” International Journal of Production Research 52 (7): 2154-2172. Kache, F., Seuring, S. 2014. “Linking collaboration and integration to risk and performance in supply chains via a review of literature reviews. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 19 (5/6), 664 –682. Keleş, B., Gómez-Acevedo, P., and Shaikh, N.I. 2018.

“The impact of systematic changes in weather on the supply and demand of beverages.” International Journal of Production Economics 195: 186–197. Kreie, A. 2013. The Adaptation of Supply Chains to Climate Change. PhD Thesis, HeriotWatt University, UK. Li, L., Cao, R., Wei, K., Wang, W., Chen, L. 2019. “Adapting climate change challenge: A new vulnerability assessment framework from the global perspective.” Journal of Cleaner Production 217: 216-224.

Lim-Camacho, L., Plagányi, É.E., Crimp, S., Hodgkinson, J.H., Hobday, A.J., Howden, S.M., Loechel, B. 2017. “Complex resource supply chains display higher resilience to simulated climate shocks.” Global Environmental Change 46: 126–138. McKinnon, A., Browne, M., Whiteing, A., Piecyk, M. -Eds.- 2015. Green Logistics: Improving the Environmental Sustainability of Logistics. London: Kogan Page Publishers. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Mehrjoo, M., and Pasek, Z.J. 2016. “Risk assessment for the supply chain of fast fashion apparel industry: a system dynamics framework.” International Journal of Production Research 54 (1): 28-48. Melkonyan, A., Krumme, K., Gruchmann, T., De La Torre, G. 2017.

“Sustainability assessment and climate change resilience in food production and supply.” Energy Procedia 123: 131-138. Mital, M., Giudice, M.D., and Papa, A. 2018. “Comparing supply chain risks for multiple product categories with cognitive mapping and Analytic Hierarchy Process.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 131: 159-170. Neely, A., Gregory, M., and Platts, K. 1995.

“Performance measurement system design: A literature review and research agenda.” International Journal of Operations & Production Management 15 (4): 80-116. OECD 2015. The Economic Consequences of Climate Change. OECD Publishing, Paris. doi:10.1787/9789264235410-en Ojha, R., Ghadge, A., Tiwari, M. K. and Bititci, U. S. 2018. Bayesian network modelling for supply chain risk propagation. International Journal of Production Research, 56(17): 5795-5819. doi: 10.1080/00207543.2018.1467059.

Olivares-Aguila, J. and ElMaraghy, W. 2020. “System dynamics modelling for supply chain disruptions.” International Journal of Production Research. doi:10.1080/00207543.2020.1725171 Özesmi, U., and Özesmi, S.L. 2004. “Ecological models based on people’s knowledge: a multi-step fuzzy cognitive mapping approach.” Ecological Modelling 176, 43–64. Quang, H.T., and Hara, Y. 2018. “Risks and performance in supply chain: the push effect.” International Journal of Production Research 56 (4): 1369-1388.

Rand, W., and Rust, R.T. 2011. “Agent-based modeling in marketing: Guidelines for rigor.” International Journal of Research in Marketing 28 (3): 181-193. Rathore, R., Thakkar, J.J., and Jha, J.K. 2020. “Impact of risks in foodgrains transportation system: a system dynamics approach.” International Journal of Production Research. doi:10.1080/00207543.2020.1725683 SCC. 2012. Supply Chain Operations Reference Model. Revision 11.0, Supply Chain Council.

Sellitto, M.A., Pereira, G.M., Borchardt, M., da Silva, R.I., Viegas, C.V. 2015. “A SCORbased model for supply chain performance measurement: application in the footwear industry.” International Journal of Production Research 53 (16): 4917-4926. Sousa Jabbour, A.B.L., Jabbour, C.J.C., Sarkis, J., Gunasekaran, A., Alves, M.W.F.M., Ribeiro, D.A. 2018.

“Decarbonisation of operations management – looking back, moving forward: a review and implications for the production research community.” International Journal of Production Research. doi:10.1080/00207543.2017.1421790 Sterman, J.D. 2000. Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World. McGraw-Hill Europe. Sussman, F.G., and Freed, J.R. 2008. Adapting to Climate Change: A Business Approach. Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Arlington. Thorpe, J., and Fennell, S. 2012.

Climate Change Risks and Supply Chain Responsibility: How should companies respond when extreme weather affects small-scale producers in their supply chain? Oxfam Discussion Papers. Accessed 15 July 2020. https://d1tn3vj7xz9fdh.cloudfront.net/s3fs-public/file_attachments/dp-climate-changerisks-supply-chain-responsibility-27062012-en_5.pdf. Turken, N., Cannataro, V., Geda, A., Dixit, A. 2020.

“Nature inspired supply chain solutions: definitions, analogies, and future research directions.” International Journal of Production Research. doi:10.1080/00207543.2020.1778206. Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A. & Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Appendix A. Table A.1.

Some of the input variables for model and associated mathematical equations Variable Additional inventory holding cost Additional transportation cost Availability of raw materials Bad weather level Equation Blockage length*0.5 Weather related delay*1 (1500*EXP(-Combined climate effect*Time)) 0.32+STEP(0.5,12*3)+STEP(0.5,12*6)+STEP(0.5,12*9)+STEP (0.5,12*12)+STEP(0.5,12*15)+STEP(0.5,12*18)+STEP(0.5,12 *21)+STEP(0.5,12*24)+STEP(0.5,12*27)+STEP(0.5,12*30)+S TEP(0.5,12*33)+STEP(0.5,12*36)+STEP(0.5,12*39) Bad weather probability ((2/12)+0.2)+STEP(0.04,12*3)+STEP(0.04,12*6)+STEP(0.04,1 2*9)+STEP(0.04,12*12)+STEP(0.04,12*15)+STEP(0.04,12*18 )+STEP(0.04,12*21)+STEP(0.04,12*24)+STEP(0.04,12*27)+S TEP(0.04,12*30)+STEP(0.04,12*33)+STEP(0.04,12*36)+STE P(0.04,12*39) badweatherRV RANDOM 0 1 () Blockage length IF THEN ELSE (Time=Blockage start, Severity of weather extreme,0) Combined climate effect ((0.5*Temperature increase+0.3*Extreme weather events1+0.2*Decrease in available land)/(2135*3)) Customer Demand RANDOM NORMAL(900, 1100 , 1000 , 20 , 1 ) Decrease in available land 5*Climate change Decrease in delivery IF THEN ELSE(badweatherRV<Bad weather speed probability,1,0)*Extreme weather events2 Delays in delivery ((Delivery lead time-7)*100)/7 Delivery lead time 7+Lead time adjustment Extreme weather events1 6*Climate change Increase in logistics cost ((Additional transportation cost+Additional inventory holding cost)*100)/7 Lead time adjustment MAX(Weather related delay, Blockage length) Manuf Inventory INTEGER(Production rate-Product delivery rate) Initial value: Safety stock Manufacturing cost 10*Production rate Manufacturing ((982.1-Production rate)*100)/982.1 productivity change Mean Blockage Time 2.2+STEP(0.4,12*3)+STEP(0.4,12*6)+STEP(0.4,12*9)+STEP( 0.4,12*12)+STEP(0.4,12*15)+STEP(0.4,12*18)+STEP(0.4,12* 21)+STEP(0.4,12*24)+STEP(0.4,12*27)+STEP(0.4,12*30)+ST EP(0.4,12*33)+STEP(0.4,12*36)+STEP(0.4,12*39) Overall SC performance (SC efficiency+SC Effectiveness)/2 Overhead absorbtion rate Manufacturing cost/Production rate Raw material price 10+(10*(1200-Availability of raw materials)/1200) Safety stock 1200 SC Effectiveness 100-((0.4*((100*Stockout amount)/1000)+0.2*((Deviation in lead time*100)/7)+0.4*Delays in delivery)/10) Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted.

SC efficiency SD of Blockage Time SD of severity Severity of weather extreme Stockout amount Supplier shipment rate Supply rate Temperature increase TIME STEP Transportation blockage Unit cost change Weather related delay 100-(0.4*((((Unit cost change-14.5)*100)/14.5)+0.4*(((982.1Manufacturing productivity change)*100)/982.1)+0.2*Delays in delivery)/50) 2 0.6 RANDOM NORMAL(1, 9 , Mean Blockage Time , SD of Blockage Time , 1)*Extreme weather events2 INTEGER(IF THEN ELSE(Manuf Inventory>=Customer Demand,0,Customer Demand-Manuf Inventory)) MIN(Supplier's Inventory,Desired production rate) MIN(Supplier shipment rate, Availability of raw materials) 8*Climate change 1 INTEGER(RANDOM NORMAL(0, 3 , 1 , 2,Time))*Extreme weather events2 (((Raw material price-7.5)*100)/7.5)+Overhead absorbtion rate+Increase in logistics cost IF THEN ELSE(Decrease in delivery speed=1,RANDOM NORMAL(0, 7, Bad weather level, SD of severity, 1),0) Appendix B.

Table B.2.

General simulation parameters (Common parameters for all scenarios) Parameter Initial available raw material Weight of temperature increase Weight of extreme weather events1 Weight of decrease in available land Level of temperature increase Level of extreme weather events1 Level of decrease in available land Supplier’s initial inventory level Raw material price at time 0 Manufacturing cost Safety stock Standard delivery lead time Additional inventory holding cost during route blockage Additional transportation cost due to delays Value 1500 units 0.5 0.3 0.2 8 6 5 1200 units 7.5 $/unit 10 $/unit 1200 units 7 days 0.5 $/unit/day 1 $/unit/day Er-Kara, M., Ghadge, A.

& Bititci, US, (2020), “Modelling the impact of climate change risk on supply chain performance”, International journal of Production Research, Accepted. Table B.2.

Scenario parameters Impact of weather events on delivery Scenarios Parameters S1L1 S1L2 S1L3 S2L1 S2L2 S2L3 S3L1 S3L2 S3L3 Mean blockage time 2 (+0.3 each 3 years) 2 2.5 (+0.4 each 3 years) 2.5 3 (+0.5 each 3 years) 3 2 (+0.3 each 3 years) 2 2.5 (+0.4 each 3 years) 2.5 3 (+0.5 each 3 years) 3 2 (+0.3 each 3 years) 2 2.5 (+0.4 each 3 years) 2.5 3 (+0.5 each 3 years) 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 9 11 13 9 11 13 9 11 13 0.3 (+0.03 each 3 years) 0.3 (+0.3 each 3 years) 0.6 0.4 (+0.04 each 3 years) 0.4 (+0.4 each 3 years) 0.7 0.5 (+0.05 each 3 years) 0.5 (+0.5 each 3 years) 0.8 0.3 (+0.03 each 3 years) 0.3 (+0.3 each 3 years) 0.6 0.4 (+0.04 each 3 years) 0.4 (+0.4 each 3 years) 0.7 0.5 (+0.05 each 3 years) 0.5 (+0.5 each 3 years) 0.8 0.3 (+0.03 each 3 years) 0.3 (+0.3 each 3 years) 0.6 0.4 (+0.04 each 3 years) 0.4 (+0.4 each 3 years) 0.7 0.5 (+0.05 each 3 years) 0.5 (+0.5 each 3 years) 0.8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 9 11 7 9 11 7 9 11 SD of blockage time Min blockage length Max blockage length Bad weather probability Mean bad weather level SD of severity Min weather related delay Max weather related delay

EcoProduction. Environmental Issues in Logistics and Manufacturing Paulina Golinska-Dawson Kune-Muh Tsai Monika Kosacka-Olejnik Editors Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices Volume 1 EcoProduction Environmental Issues in Logistics and Manufacturing Series Editor Paulina Golinska-Dawson, Poznań, Poland The EcoProduction Series is a forum for presenting emerging environmental issues in Logistics and Manufacturing.

Its main objective is a multidisciplinary approach to link the scientiﬁc activities in various manufacturing and logistics ﬁelds with the sustainability research. It encompasses topical monographs and selected conference proceedings, authored or edited by leading experts as well as by promising young scientists.

The Series aims to provide the impulse for new ideas by reporting on the state-of-the-art and motivating for the future development of sustainable manufacturing systems, environmentally conscious operations management and reverse or closed loop logistics. It aims to bring together academic, industry and government personnel from various countries to present and discuss the challenges for implementation of sustainable policy in the ﬁeld of production and logistics.

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/10152 Paulina Golinska-Dawson Kune-Muh Tsai Monika Kosacka-Olejnik • • Editors Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices Volume 1 123 Editors Paulina Golinska-Dawson Faculty of Engineering Management Poznań University of Technology Poznań, Poland Kune-Muh Tsai Department of Logistics Management National Kaohsiung University of Science and Technology Kaohsiung, Taiwan Monika Kosacka-Olejnik Faculty of Engineering Management Poznań University of Technology Poznań, Poland ISSN 2193-4614 ISSN 2193-4622 (electronic) EcoProduction ISBN 978-3-030-61946-6 ISBN 978-3-030-61947-3 (eBook) https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3 © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 This work is subject to copyright.

All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.

The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication.

Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland Preface The integration of the physical infrastructure and information systems is challenging but necessary in order to achieve more environmentally friendly, efﬁcient, safe management of logistics and supply chain operations.

In the last decade, the development of trends, such as Internet of Things, Industry 4.0 and advanced data analytics, opens new possibilities in order to achieve more timely and reliable deliveries of goods. However, expectations of the customers with regards to frequent and door-to-door deliveries (e-commerce) must be combined with the policy guidelines on CO2 reductions, especially in urban areas.

Pressure on the reduction of greenhouse gases emissions encourages development of new methods, tools and new technologies, which are cleaner and more efﬁcient. This book entitled Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices presents a multidisciplinary approach. It contains selected theoretical and empirical studies.

The Authors in the individual chapters discuss the original methods and tools, as well as practical case studies on topics, as follows: • • • • Smart Supply Chain Management, Sustainable supply chain and logistics, Human factor in logistics and supply chain management, Modelling and optimization of the supply chain and logistics operations.

This monograph includes the selected papers of the Authors who have submitted their work to the 15th International Congress on Logistics and SCM Systems (ICLS 2020). Although not all of the received chapters appear in this book, the efforts spent and the work done for this book are very much appreciated. The ICLS 2020 is organized by the Faculty of Engineering Management, Poznań University of Technology and the International Federation of Logistics and SCM Systems (IFLS).

We would like to express our gratitude to the Board of the International Federation of Logistics and SCM Systems (IFLS) for the invaluable contribution to the volume: v vi Preface • Honorary Chairman: Prof. Karasawa, Yutaka, Kanagawa University, Japan. • Advisors: Prof. Kachitvichyanukul, Voratas, Asian Institute of Technology, Thailand; Prof. Katayama, Hiroshi, Waseda University, Japan. • Chairman: Prof. Tsai, Kune-Muh, National Kaohsiung University of Science and Technology, Taiwan.

• Vice Chairmen: Prof. Lai, Kin Keung, City University of Hong Kong; Prof. Liu, Xiaohong, Central University of Finance and Economics, China; Prof. Rim, Suk-Chul, Ajou University, Korea; Sethanan, Kanchana, Khon Kaen Univesity, Thailand; Prof. Wakabayashi, Keizo, Nihon University, Japan and Wu, Yenchun Jim, National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan. • The Board Members. This scientiﬁc monograph has been double-blind reviewed.

We would like to thank all reviewers whose names are not listed in the volume due to the conﬁdentiality of the process. Their voluntary service and comments helped the authors to improve the quality of the manuscripts. Paulina Golinska-Dawson Kune-Muh Tsai Monika Kosacka-Olejnik Contents Smart Supply Chain Management and Logistics Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Lorenz Trautmann and Rainer Lasch 3 Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Arkadiusz Kawa 25 Evaluation and Control of a Collaborative Automated Picking System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mathias Rieder and Richard Verbeet 41 Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identiﬁcation in Logistics and Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Seng Fat Wong and Weng Ian Ho 61 Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Kamila Kluska and Patrycja Hoffa-Dąbrowska The Possibilities of Digitizing the Preparation Process for Shipping Batteries in a Distribution Warehouse—A Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Łukasz Brzeziński and Magdalena Krystyna Wyrwicka 73 91 Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design for Industry 4.0 Digital Innovation Hubs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

101 Adam Olszewski and Pawel Pawlewski Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs in Terms of the Omnichannel Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113 Roman Domański and Hubert Wojciechowski vii viii Contents Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State in Selected European Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

133 Joanna Oleśków-Szłapka, Irena Pawłyszyn, Francesco Facchini, Agnieszka Stachowiak, and Ana Paula Tanajura Ellefsen Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India . . . . . . . . . 153 Pankaj Kant and Sanjay Gupta Approaches, Challenges and Impacts of Asian Regional Multimodal Logistics for Supply Chain Integration and Interdependencies . . . . . . . 165 Michael Smith, Adam Voak, and Don Gunasekera Electric Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Cargo Weight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175 Sina Rastani, Tuğçe Yüksel, and Bülent Çatay Applicability of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought to Modern Corporate Governance in the Maritime Shipping Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191 Shiang-Min Meng Human Factor in Logistics and Supply Chain Management Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics: Challenges and Recommendations for Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

203 Christian Hein, Nora Eichhorn, and Rainer Lasch P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization of Distribution Plans: A Case of United Nations Humanitarian Response Depots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225 Eligüzel İbrahim Miraç and Özceylan Eren International Logistics Criteria of Medicinal Products for Human Use: How Do They Relate to Cargo Logistics Providers? . . . . . . . . . . . .

247 Shiang-Min Meng Human Factor in Industry 4.0—Perception of Competences of Graduates and Employees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257 Anna Stasiuk-Piekarska Management of the Human Capital of the Persons with Disabilities in Logistics Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267 Krzysztof Czyrka and Józef Frąś Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During Handling of Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

277 Adam Górny Contents ix Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining, Analytics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Logistics Departments . . . . . 291 Magdalena Graczyk-Kucharska, Maciej Szafrański, Selma Gütmen, Marek Goliński, Małgorzata Spychała, Gerhard-Wilhelm Weber, Zbigniew Włodarczak, Semih Kuter, and Ayşe Özmen Modeling and Optimization of the Supply Chain and Logistics Operations Classiﬁcation of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions . . .

307 Katarzyna Grzybowska and Agnieszka Stachowiak Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions—Causal Loop Dynamics of Relations Between Academia and Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323 Agnieszka Stachowiak, Joanna Oleśków-Szłapka, Przemysław Niewiadomski, and Natalia Pawlak The Supply Planning in the Distribution Network Using the Dynamic Programming Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

339 Fertsch Marek Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise Linear Warehousing Cost Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347 Fabian Alexander Torres Cárdenas and Carlos Eduardo Díaz Bohórquez Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable Facility Location Problems with Facility Disruptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 363 Mohammad Rohaninejad, Zdeněk Hanzálek, and Reza Tavakkoli-Moghaddam IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 381 Zied Bahroun, Mohamed Ben-Daya, and Elkaﬁ Hassini Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series for a Pharmaceutical Supply Chain with a Marketing Mix Strategy and Product Life Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 395 Farzaneh S. Shakouhi, Reza Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, Armand Baboli, and Ali Bozorgi-Amiri Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting and Post-harvest Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

407 Thanaphorn Sornprom, Voratas Kachitvichyanukul, and Kanokporn Kungwalsong Roadmap for a Successful Implementation of a Predictive Maintenance Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 423 Marcel André Hoffmann and Rainer Lasch Smart Supply Chain Management and Logistics Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay Lorenz Trautmann and Rainer Lasch Abstract Smart contract technology is beginning to alter the way supply chain processes are designed and executed.

Blockchains enable peer-to-peer networks where contractual terms are automatically executed without the need for unbiased intermediaries. Due to the immutability of blockchains, smart contracts reduce risks and provide traceable audit trails of all transactions. Moreover, smart contracts can be automatically triggered, resulting in decreasing administration and service costs while improving process efficiencies.

These attributes make smart contract technology a promising invention for the poorly automated procure-to-pay process. That is, if the existing technological limitation, like poor scalability, high energy consumption, and limited transaction throughput, can be solved.

The primary purpose of this chapter is to investigate how smart contracts can be implemented into existing procure-to-pay processes, what advantages can be gained from the application, and which technological restrictions are yet to overcome. To this end, a systematic literature review was conducted. Academic and practitioner literature were analyzed based on a qualitative and deductive methodology.

Additionally, this chapter presents a use case for smart contracts in procure-to-pay in the context of international trade. That way, it lays a foundation for future research, provides valuable insight for procurement managers, and offers approaches to overcome the most pressing challenges. Keywords Smart contracts · Blockchain · Procurement · Procure-to-Pay · Distributed-ledger L. Trautmann (B) · R. Lasch Chair of Business Management, esp.

Logistics, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany e-mail: lorenz.trautmann@tu-dresden.de © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_1 3 4 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch 1 Introduction Since the inception of cryptocurrencies, blockchain-based technologies, such as smart contracts, have gained significant attention for having possible applications in other fields. One of the most promising areas that may gain from adoption is the supply chain.

Due to their safe and autonomous execution, smart contracts are suitable for the automation of various intercompany processes throughout the supply chain. Especially the integration of smart contracts into the procure-to-pay process holds the promise of automating procurement procedures and creating an inter-company single-source-of-truth supplier network. The procure-to-pay process is composed of sequential steps necessary for a company to undertake during the procurement of goods or services.

Because these steps consist of many standardizeable processes that involve a variety of parties, the use of smart contract technology offers great potential for optimization. This paper explores the improvements that smart contract technology can bring to generic procure-to-pay processes, which technological limitations prevent the technology from being used in practice, and which approaches exist for solving these issues.

Additionally, this paper demonstrates the findings by developing a use case in the context of international trade. The term “smart contracts” was coined in 1994 by Nick Szabo, a computer scientist, who defined a smart contract as a “computerized transaction protocol that executes the terms of a contract” (Szabo 1994). However, up until recently, smart contracts lacked the opportunity of a real-world application.

With the invention of Bitcoin in 2008 (Nakamoto 2008), the underlying blockchain network emerged as a disruptive technology for many industries. The combination of a distributed-ledger technology with consensus mechanisms, and cryptographic algorithms form a perfect platform for the implementation of smart contracts, and a breeding pool for further development.

Generally speaking, smart contracts are self-executing “if-then-statements”, that are written into code and are deployed on and secured by a blockchain. Although the name suggests differently, smart contracts are not contracts in a legal sense. They are software that can enforce conditions stemming from legal documents made by two or more parties. Compared to conventional contracts, smart contracts offer distinct advantages.

Once implemented into a blockchain, smart contracts cannot be altered or manipulated. This fact mitigates the risk of fraud while simultaneously providing an audit trail of all transactions. Furthermore, smart contracts are executed automatically, resulting in decreasing administration costs, elimination of the need for unbiased third parties, more efficient process execution and reduced turnaround times (Brody 2017; Capgemini 2019; DHL & Accenture 2018; Prinz and Schulte 2017).

While the potential upside of smart contracts is undisputed, several challenges and limitations are yet to be solved. These challenges include legal issues (general civil law, data protection law, and questions of legal provability), functional requirements (human-readable code, block randomness), economic considerations Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 5 (cost-benefit-analysis), and technological restrictions.

This paper focuses on the technological issues of smart contracts and the IT system landscape (e.g. scalability, energy consumption, and performance restrictions). The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology used in this study. Section 3 provides the technological background of blockchains and smart contracts and presents popular types and platforms.

Section 4 then summarizes the findings, including the positive impact smart contract technology can have on procure-to-pay processes, which technological challenges currently limit smart contract technology, as well as possible solutions to these challenges. Section 5 demonstrates a use case for smart contracts in procure-to-pay. Section 6 concludes the paper. 2 Methodology This section illustrates the procedure adopted for examining smart contracts in the context of the procure-to-pay process.

To achieve a holistic, transdisciplinary understandin.ng of the topic and to guarantee relevant results, a systematic literature review, as proposed by Tranfield et al. (2003), complemented by several authors, (Kitchenham and Charters 2007; Brocke et al. 2015), was conducted. To this end, a qualitative and deductive approach was chosen. Following Tranfield et al. (2003), the steps shown in Fig. 1 were carried out.

Stage 1—Planning the Review The main goal of this paper is to investigate the way smart contract technology can impact the procure-to-pay process. The lack of a classification of the immense potential and the severe existing limitations, as well as an insufficient amount of applicable use cases, justify the need for a systematic review and this study. To reduce possible researcher bias, a search protocol was created.

The following search string was chosen after conducting pilot searches: [“blockchain” OR “distributed ledger” OR “smart contracts”] AND [“procurement” Or “purchase” OR “supply chain” OR “logistics”]. The term “bitcoin” was not included since it led to papers with a focus on the economic topic of cryptocurrencies.

The chosen databases were Ebsco Host (Academic Search Complete, Business Source Complete, Econ Lit), Elsevier Science Direct, Emerald Insight, Wiso Wirtschaftswissenschaften, Springer Link, and Scopus. Stage 2—Conducting the Review After applying the search protocol in the scientific databases, 691 papers were identified. After removing doubles, the literature was screened based on titles, leaving 90 papers.

The following screening of the abstracts yielded 38 papers that suggested proximity to the research questions. These papers were analyzed based on the full text. Finally, 17 scientific papers were deemed relevant for answering the research questions. However, to review the current state of new technologies, a wide range of sources must be included in the review (Webster and Watson 2002). Since the 6 Fig. 1 Stages for conducting the systematic literature review (own depiction based on Tranfield et al.

2003) L. Trautmann and R. Lasch Stage I - Planning the review Phase 0: Identification of the need for a review Phase 1: Development of a review protocol Stage II - Conducting the review Phase 2: Identification of research Phase 3: Selection of studies Phase 4: Data analysis and synthesis Stage III - Reporting and dissemination Phase 5: Report and recommendation phase Phase 6: Getting evidence into practice academic assessment of technological innovation tends to lag behind practitioner literature and to emphasize the exploratory character of this paper, as well as the practical relevance of smart contract technologies, several white papers by business consultancies and research institutions were added to the relevant literature.

Subsequently, the identified literature was analyzed based on a qualitative and deductive approach. The extant information was analyzed and synthesized according to the analysis-based literature review proposed by Seuring and Gold (2012). Codes were created by reading the texts and extracting the strengths and weaknesses of smart contracts in procure-to-pay processes. To create the codes, a qualitative data analysis software (MaxQDA 2018, Ver. 18.2.0) was used.

Stage 3—Reporting and Dissemination The last stage consists of the presentation of the findings. To lay the foundation, the technological basics for smart contracts and blockchain in general are outlined, as well as different types of blockchains and smart contract platforms.

Based on that, improvements that smart contract technology can bring to procure-to-pay processes, technological limitations that prevent the technology from being used in practice, and approaches for solving these issues are presented. Building on those findings, a use case, according to Cockburn (2000), for smart contracts in an international trading process is discussed.

According to Cockburn, a use case is a “description of the possible sequences of interactions between the system under discussion and its Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 7 external actors, related to a particular goal” (Cockburn 2000). Finally, conclusions about the results, limitations, and possible future research fields will be drawn. 3 Technological Background Current smart contract technology relies on blockchains for implementation and safe execution (DeRose 2016).

For that reason, the following section introduces blockchain technology and types of blockchains, followed by an overview of smart contracts and development platforms. 3.1 Blockchain Technology The concept of blockchain was first described in a paper by Satoshi Nakamoto (Nakamoto 2008). Due to versatile further development in various disciplines, no consistent definition of the term can be found in the literature.

Nevertheless, several organizations are working on developing a uniform definition for blockchains. In 2017 the technical committee ISO/TC 307: Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies was founded by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) with the goal of defining the concepts of identity, interoperability, governance, security and privacy, use cases and smart contracts in the context of blockchain technology (Bundesverband and e.V.

2017; Deutsche Institut für Normung 2017; International Organization for Standardization 2017). The blockchain is a kind of database that consists of a chain of chronologically arranged data blocks, stored on users’ computers in the same form and with identical content.

It is a special form of a distributed ledger that uses cryptographic technologies, consensus mechanisms and peer-to-peer connections, to ensure the integrity and authenticity of the data without central control (Drescher and Lenz 2017; Meier and Stormer 2018; Mitschele 2018; Pearson et al. 2019). Transactions that occur in the network are combined with other transaction and implemented into a block.

This block is then irreversibly attached to the previous block using a specific communication and verification protocol. In this way, a chain of blocks is created, thus naming the technology “blockchain”. A change in a previous block would affect every following block, making it virtually impossible to change or delete previous transactions (Mik 2017; Wang et al. 2019). The blockchain is not governed by one single party, nor does a central administration for complying with the rules exist.

Rather, the blockchain is stored within the distributed system as an identical copy on every node. Every participant of the distributed systems has equal rights and contributes to the adherence of the protocol (Bosch and Penthin 2018; DHL & Accenture 2018; Mullender 1993). A peer-to-peer connection directly connects the nodes for them to communicate, execute consensus protocols, exchange data and even calculation resources among each other.

Because 8 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch of the data being distributed in the network, no single-point-of- failure exists. Consequentially, the data is protected against system failure and unwanted interventions (Drescher and Lenz 2017). To ensure data integrity, secure transmission and user authenticity, blockchains use two cryptographic elements as essential parts, digital signatures and hash functions.

Digital signatures aim to verify the integrity of messages that are exchanged via the blockchain and ensure the authenticity of participants. To achieve this goal, digital signatures are created using two keys via a two-stage, asynchronous encryption method. The private key generates the signature and is used to sign the message. It is only known to the sender of the message.

The public key, on the other hand, is accessible to everyone and serves to verify the authenticity of the generated signature (Badev and Chen 2014; DHL & Accenture 2018; Meier and Stormer 2018). Socalled hash functions tackle another challenge blockchain-technology faces. Huge amounts of data circulate within the network and algorithms are needed to make the data identifiable and comparable in a simple way. Hash functions can generate a unique fingerprint of a character string of any length.

Small changes in the text trigger a large change in the hash value. Therefore, by comparing the original hash value with a newly created one, users can validate the integrity of messages and determine possible interferences. These fingerprints can easily be calculated based on the content of the message, but it is almost impossible to deduce the content of the message knowing only the hash value. Because of this property, hash functions are often referred to as “one-way-functions” (Casino et al.

2019; Drescher and Lenz 2017; Hald and Kinra 2019). For a large network of users with equal rights and without central management, mechanisms for reaching agreement on the current network status must be installed. A democratic process, including all participants, would be costly and timeconsuming. Therefore, Blockchains use consensus mechanisms to define the status of the network. Since the inception of blockchain technology, many different consensus mechanisms were invented.

They mainly differ in the way in which the node that defines the new status of the network is selected. All mechanisms have in common that the creator of the new block (called “miner”) must prove himself worthy of the task, for example, by solving a difficult mathematical task (Proof-of-Work) or by blocking a large amount of the owned cryptocurrency (Proof-of-Stake) (Casino et al. 2019; Cole et al. 2019).

3.2 Types of Blockchains Blockchains can be divided into three categories according to access and usage rights. The public blockchain can be used by anyone without access restrictions. Each node can participate in consensus building and transaction verification. For this purpose, the program code is available as open-source. Each transaction within the network is publicly accessible. An example of a public blockchain is Bitcoin (O’Leary 2017).

Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 9 For certain use cases, however, it can be useful to restrict access to certain users. These blockchains are referred to as private blockchains. They are used, for example, within a company or across companies, where it is necessary to limit the users to the participating contractual partners. Transactions can be presented transparently to all participants and stored in a forgery-proof manner without being disclosed to the public.

Furthermore, the reduced size of private blockchains require less computing capacity which results in increased performance (DHL & Accenture 2018; O’Leary 2017). A mixture of the two is the so-called consortium blockchain. This hybrid blockchain tries to combine the advantages of private and public networks. In terms of access restriction, this hybrid behaves like private blockchains. However, the management of the network is not the responsibility of one participant, but a group.

They decide on access regulations, rights for participants and make decisions for the entire network. The consortium blockchain has the efficiency and data protection of private blockchains but removes the autonomy of the leading user of the private blockchain (O’Leary 2017). The exact design of the blockchain should be based on the objective pursued, the size of the network and data protection aspects.

3.3 Smart Contract Basics The paper by Nick Szabo defined the term “smart contract” as “a set of promises, specified in digital form, including protocols within which the parties perform on these promises” (Szabo 1994). In other words, a smart contract is a piece of written code recording contracting parties’ mutual promises and enforces those promises on a suitable platform. The blockchain offers for the first time a platform on which smart contracts can be stored and executed (DeRose 2016).

Just like other transactions, smart contracts are integrated into blocks and remain within the blockchain after completion of the transaction. The miner initiates the program code in the validation process of the corresponding block (Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik 2019; Wang et al. 2019).

Although the name suggests a legally binding contract, smart contracts are computer programs that can merely realize legal contracts by performing actions based on the agreement between multiple parties as soon as “if-then” conditions have been met (Allam 2019; Debono 2019). The rigidity of these “if-then-statements” and the fact that smart contracts must be understood by machines directly influences the way how legal contracts, which are to be used as the basis, must be structured.

In business transactions, circumstances and business relationships are constantly changing. Therefore, in some cases, it is necessary to deviate from contractual clauses, by mutual agreement, for the benefit of the business relationship. However, the immutability of the blockchain and the automatic execution of smart contracts by means of “if-then-conditions” leave no room for non-contractual arrangements.

Therefore, smart contracts will have to be programmed in a way that allows for a certain degree of leeway for the fulfillment of contractual terms. This in turn means, 10 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch that legal contracts must be formulated more precisely and possible deviations from the regular fulfillment of the contract must already be decided and agreed upon when the legal contract is concluded.

The result will be much more detailed legal contracts covering a wider range of different business conditions and resulting actions (Fertig and Schütz 2019). 3.4 Smart Contract Platforms Smart contracts cannot be implemented on any arbitrary blockchain but need a specific type of platform. These blockchain platforms differ from pure cryptocurrency platforms in that they offer a broader application spectrum than the pure transfer of digital money.

They are able to execute generic code, necessary for executing smart contracts (Bocek et al. 2017). The following section presents three smart contract platforms that were chosen because of their technological maturity: Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric and R3 Corda (Bocek and Stiller 2017). Ethereum is a blockchain platform that executes general decentralized applications.

It uses Turing-complete programming languages, such as Solidity, Serpent and Mutan, allowing for the implementation of smart contracts and decentralized applications. Similar to Bitcoin, Ethereum uses the Proof-of-Work algorithm for generating consensus and an account-based data model for identifying users. The miners that perform the algorithms necessary for reaching consensus are rewarded with the cryptocurrency Ether. Users pay for their transaction to be included in the blockchain (Luu et al.

2016; Zheng et al. 2020). Laurence deems Ethereum as one of the “most developed and accessible blockchains in the ecosystem and an industry leader in innovation and blockchain applications” (Laurence 2017). Hyperledger Fabric is an open-source protocol for private and restricted decentralized databases, which was launched in December 2015 by the Linux Foundation (Cachin 2016). Unlike Ethereum, Hyperledger utilizes conventional programming languages like Java and Go, which also are Turing-complete.

For executing smart contracts, Hyperledger uses Docker container. The modular structure of containers simplifies the designing process, allows for the precise allocation of access rights for individual users and therefore, helps with the scalability of the blockchain. However, the modular principle only allows for a limited degree of individualization. The platform is designed for networks where members are at least partially trusted, and consensus can be reached easily.

Hyperledger uses the Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT) consensus mechanism. The drawback of this algorithm is a prolonged consensus process (Zheng et al. 2020). The R3 Corda protocol is specialized for the application in the financial industry and was developed by various banks and financial providers in 2016. The platform utilizes high-level programming languages like Java and Kotlin, which are carried out by the Java Virtual Machine (Brown 2018; Zheng et al. 2020).

This platform is usually used for private blockchains, where trust between participants is high and consensus can be reached more easily. To this end, Corda uses the Raft consensus algorithm Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 11 (Howard et al. 2015). The advantage of this mechanism is the high data security since exclusively parties involved in the transaction have access to the data.

The validity and uniqueness of the transaction are ensured by central network participants, socalled “Notary Nodes”. The transaction parties themselves guarantee the correctness of the transaction. Another significant advantage of this platform is the possibility to integrate contracts in written form as metadata into the blockchain. This way, a legal legitimation of the transaction is directly included in the blockchain.

However, the drawbacks for the use in procurement include recentralization through the “notary nodes” and the focus on the financial market (Brown 2018; Howard et al. 2015). 4 Smart Contracts for Procure-to-Pay The procure-to-pay process is part of the operational procurement activities of businesses. It describes the necessary steps for a company to undertake when ordering goods or services.

The process includes various parties, such as buyers, suppliers, banks, and transportation providers, resulting in a complex process with a wide range of different application and communication systems, considerable interface effort as well as lengthy and error-prone manual activities (Arnolds et al. 2010).

The following section illustrates how current procure-to-pay solutions and communications protocols can be improved by blockchain and smart contracts and in which way these technologies can help to tackle typical issues and improve existing procureto-pay processes. Afterwards, technological limitations and possible solutions are discussed. 4.1 Current Procure-to-Pay Solutions Business activities in most companies nowadays are managed by Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems.

These systems are used for a wide range of functions such as accounting, human resource and also procurement activities, like the procure-topay process. Because of the uniqueness of business procedures ERP systems must be individually adapted to the requirements of each company. The ERP system plays a vital role in transforming an organization´s internal processes. However, these ERP systems do not connect the company to other organizations.

Supply chains are ecosystems with a multitude of participating companies, which contribute to the value chain in various types and with different processes. As each company uses individual ERP systems and these systems are often not connected, it is difficult to get an overview of the entire supply chain with the current ERP technology (Banerjee 2018; Linke and Strahringer 2018). This can change fundamentally through the use of blockchain and smart contracts.

These technologies can function as the missing links between the various ERP systems. By connecting the existing ERP systems to a blockchain network, a secure, reliable, and immutable single-source-of-truth, for all 12 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch supply chain participants to attain, emerges.

With the inclusion of smart contracts, transactions between companies can now be automated across the entire supply chain including various IT systems (Banerjee 2018; Bosch and Penthin 2018; Brody 2017; DHL & Accenture 2018; Linke and Strahringer 2018). The development and introduction of ERP systems are cost-intensive and usually take several years. It is quite difficult to make changes to ERP systems afterwards or to add new functions.

That is why, when integrating blockchains into existing ERP systems, it must be ensured that minimal modifications to the existing ERP systems and minimal disruption to regular business processes are made. That way, companies do not have to change their internally used systems and still can reap the benefits from the transparency of a blockchain-based supply chain (Linke and Strahringer 2018).

As soon as the ERP systems are connected to the blockchain and smart contracts are embedded in the blockchain, this enables the automation of entire process chains along the supply chain, while at the same time increasing trust between participants and transparency of supply chain processes. 4.2 Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and Blockchain Communication between participants of procure-to-pay processes is oftentimes based on EDI.

EDI is a universal language that refers of the exchange of data between application systems of different companies using electronic transfer procedures (Banerjee 2018; Boschi et al. 2018; Fiaidhi et al. 2018). In procure-to-pay, EDI is used in a variety of processes, such as orders, shipping and involves. Business documents based on the international EDI standards (e.g.

UN/EDIFACT and ANSI X12.4) can be transferred electronically between participants without the need to re-enter information (Boschi et al. 2018; Fiaidhi et al. 2018). However, with the advent of the fourth industrial revolution and new technologies, like the Internet of Things, many business processes have changed fundamentally. Supply chains are more complex and dynamic than ever before.

Supply networks consist of international companies, large numbers of goods and products, various means of transportation, as well as an abundance of payment and information flows. Current EDI systems cannot adequately support these complex supply chains for several reasons. One problem with EDI systems is that once the EDI message is transmitted, the submitting company loses all visibility of the information and the current system status.

Only when the EDI message comes back as an invoice, for example, conclusions can be drawn (Boschi et al. 2018). Furthermore, conventional EDI systems are based on one-way, point-to-point communication which means that the messages can only be read by the two parties directly involved. Third parties, for whom the content of the messages could also have consequences are left out.

Additionally, if a participant makes an error in an EDI message, for example, if data is entered incorrectly, fields are swapped, or master data is loaded into another participant’s system, other partners are not informed, and the error travels through the system. Therefore, additional methods are currently required to maintain data Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 13 integrity.

These include manual maintenance, communication via e-mails and thirdparty services that keep the data synchronized. In today’s dynamic business world, customers and suppliers need shared, real-time information about the actual situation of supply chains, as well as automated early detection systems for incidents. For EDI to cope with the new complex processes of supply chains, they need a secure, and shared data source.

Without that, EDI messages will have great difficulty in accurately mapping the communication between all the various supply chain participants (Boschi et al. 2018; Fiaidhi et al. 2018). The blockchain can complement EDI systems by providing increased transparency and reliable data through distributed-ledger technology.

By presenting information in a secure, auditable, and transparent way, the blockchain can overcome the weaknesses of one-way, point-to-point, and batch approaches of existing communication protocols (Banerjee 2018). This will enable companies to jointly identify and solve problems and overall reduce costly bottlenecks (Boschi et al. 2018; Fiaidhi et al. 2018). Whether blockchain technology will replace or supplement existing messaging systems is questionable.

Some argue that it would be more successful to supplement existing communication systems rather than fully replace them with blockchains while others suppose that blockchain technology will completely replace EDI systems and will institute a completely new way of B2B communication (Banerjee 2018; Fiaidhi et al. 2018). 4.3 Process Automation Nowadays, the flow of materials through the supply chain is highly automated, thanks to intelligent planning concepts using the latest technology (e.g.

ERP systems). The flow of cash and information, on the other hand, is completely detached from the high degree of automation of the material flow (Schütte et al. 2017). To illustrate this point, the average receivable of a U.S. Fortune 100 company is 60 days old, even though the average payment period is only 30 days long (Brody 2017; Capgemini 2019). This delay in payment results in a drastic increase in necessary operational assets and leads to delays in corporate decision making.

Responsible are time-consuming and error-prone steps of the procure-to-pay process. The individual activities are often cumbersome, as they are largely initiated manually and involve coordination with many parties. For instance, invoice processing for 60% of corporate transactions is conventionally done by manually writing an invoice on a sheet of paper by the supplier, and manually initiating payment by the buyer (Schütte et al. 2017).

Through the use of smart contracts, the entire invoice processing can be automated and synchronized with the material flow, eradicating relating inefficiencies. Beyond that, unnecessary process steps and intermediaries can be removed, thereby reducing cost, time, data sources, interfaces and IT systems (Capgemini 2019; Guyonnet and 14 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch Mohammed 2016; Prinz and Schulte 2017).

In that way, smart contracts can help to close the “analogous gap” and contribute to a synchronized flow of materials, information and money (Apptus 2018; Eickemeyer et al. 2018; Stahlbock et al. 2018). 4.4 Transparency and Traceability During the course of globalization, the number of goods and commodities transported worldwide has increased exponentially. There are more than 500,000 shipping companies in the USA alone (DHL & Accenture 2018).

The results are complex supply chain processes with large numbers of parties, non-standardized processes, various IT systems, databases and a low level of transparency. Companies face the challenge of obtaining reliable information about the origin and condition of materials and the status of payment as a basis for planning and decision-making.

Despite enormous investments in digital infrastructures, continuous insight into the entire supply chain cannot be provided adequately with conventional technologies (Apptus 2018; Bosch and Penthin 2018; Brody 2017).

Smart contract technology, in combination with blockchains and IoT sensors, can monitor the manufacturing and transportation conditions as well as whereabouts of goods in real-time while simultaneously serving as a consistent source of information for all participants (Apptus 2018; Capgemini 2019). The blockchain makes information visible, for instance, the identity of the manufacturer as well as production and transportation conditions of the product.

Given this information, smart contracts can verify whether safety and environmental regulations were complied with. In this way, the growing demand of customers for transparent and sustainable supply chains can be met, without the high costs for certification by auditors (Apptus 2018; Eickemeyer et al. 2018; Guyonnet and Mohammed 2016; Kouhizadeh et al. 2018; Stahlbock et al. 2018). Several examples of projects using the blockchain for increasing supply chain transparency are found in the literature.

The project “Modum” aspires to track and ensure transportation quality of pharmaceuticals. IoT sensors measure data such as temperature and humidity during the entire transportation process. This information is submitted automatically to the blockchain, where smart contracts compare it to the product’s requirements (Bocek et al. 2017; DHL & Accenture 2018). Another company, called “Everledger” offers systems for tracking and protecting valuable goods based on their characteristics.

Ownership can be verified by comparing the unique properties of the luxury items with data in the blockchain, similar to a fingerprint (Prinz and Schulte 2017; Straube et al. 2018). Besides, the blockchain not only holds promises for materialistic goods. The transfer of ownership rights of digital goods, such as copyrights and legal claims, can be processed and stored by smart contracts. This becomes relevant wherever licenses and other rights are acquired.

Application examples are found in the context of warranty and guarantee claims, spare parts business or the paperless processing Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 15 of dangerous goods transports (Bosch and Penthin 2018; Camelot 2017; DHL & Accenture 2018; Eickemeyer et al. 2018; Guyonnet and Mohammed 2016). The traceability of the individual process steps can also have effects on the provability in legal disputes.

The most common cases in procurement include delays in deliveries, the disappearance of goods or the failure to make payments. With the help of blockchains, responsible parties can be identified (Eickemeyer et al. 2018). Besides, the transparent presentation of relevant data serves to prevent corruption, bribery, money laundering, fraud and other legal violations, such as child labor.

This increases the trustworthiness towards end customers and helps to identify sources of complaints and to check for compliant processes (Bocek et al. 2017; Straube et al. 2018). Additionally, the transparent audit trail left in the blockchain has major implications for future procurement reporting. The high number of transactions within purchasing departments makes a complete overview difficult.

Various subdepartments, employees and in special cases, even other companies carry out the purchase orders. Large companies face the challenge of collecting all necessary data for comprehensive reporting. In some cases, up to 60 employees are on the payroll for obtaining information regarding procurement activities (Brody 2017). The blockchain offers a database on which all transactions are stored and displayed, regardless of who executed them.

Negotiations and contract processing between companies and their suppliers leave behind chronological and unchangeable audit trails within the blockchain that all participants can access and relay on Apptus (2018), Bosch and Penthin (2018), Capgemini (2019), DHL & Accenture (2018), Guyonnet and Mohammed (2016), Schütte et al. (2017). Not only large companies would benefit from blockchain technology.

Access to origin and manufacturing data allows for transparent value creation processes and reduces the incentive for companies to withdraw excessive profits from the individual stages of the supply chain, resulting in better pricing and balancing of information asymmetries (Saberi et al. 2019; Yoo and Won 2018). A more transparent and marketconform pricing based on the actual market in procurement would be the result.

Particularly small companies are affected by the asymmetries that currently prevent them from competing with their larger rivals (Apptus 2018). 4.5 Data Security and Integrity The role of cybersecurity is growing immensely. Companies must find ways of ensuring data accuracy, validity and integrity, while simultaneously being hyperconnected to all necessary participants along the supply chain.

In the financial sector, where blockchain applications are showing promising results, the modern methods of data encryption and cryptography have helped the blockchain being nicknamed “The Trust Machine” by the Economist. Blockchains can secure databases against humancaused errors, intentional manipulation and system failure (Bosch and Penthin 2018; 16 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch Camelot 2017; DHL & Accenture 2018; Eickemeyer et al. 2018; Guyonnet and Mohammed 2016; Prinz and Schulte 2017).

By automating procurement processes, smart contracts reduce manual intervention, and thereby, the susceptibility to human-caused errors. Furthermore, a typical security gap of central databases called the “single point of failure”, can be closed. This weak spot leads, in the event of its own malfunctioning, to the failure of the entire system.

The redundant distribution of the database on all nodes of the network and the immutability of integrated blocks protects from the risk of total system failure, limits the impact of hacker attacks on the entire system, and secures against intentional manipulation (Capgemini 2019; Kouhizadeh et al. 2018; Stahlbock et al. 2018). 4.6 Technological Restrictions The technological restrictions of smart contracts are closely linked to the development of the blockchain.

Particularly with large numbers of participants, blockchains currently come up against their technical boundaries. With each new block, the data volume, and therefore, calculation difficulty increases. Consequently, large networks require great storage space, robust internet connection, high computing power and immense energy.

These fundamental limitations reduce the scalability of blockchain networks nowadays and prevent smart contract technology currently for being used for extensive networks with many participants and transactions (Bosch and Penthin 2018; DHL and Accenture 2018). Several solutions to tackle these issues are promoted in the literature. One approach to reducing the amount of memory needed is using external data storage. The blockchain would only contain a reference to the original files.

This reference is stored as a hash value, which can access external information while ensuring its integrity (Schütte et al. 2017). To reduce the required computing power and therefore, energy consumption, different consensus mechanisms are being proposed. With the so-called Proof-ofStake, a functioning alternative to the Proof-of-Work exists. This approach reduces the impact of large numbers of users on scalability.

Further approaches are the deletion of expired data (Unspent Transaction Output) and the partitioning of the blockchain (Prinz and Schulte 2017). Another point of criticism is the reduced performance of blockchain systems. The Bitcoin blockchain balances itself out at approximately seven transactions per second, compared to the transaction of the financial services corporation Visa with more than 2,500 transactions per second (Straube et al. 2018).

The reason for the limited amount of transactions are computing processes needed for guaranteeing the safety and integrity of the data. These cryptographic means are necessary to ensure a peer-to-peer network without the need for intermediaries. A possible solution is the partial centralization of the calculation to increase processing speed.

While this approach does increase computing velocity, it is accompanied by a reduction of the decentralization of the network and the associated advantages (Schütte et al. 2017). Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 17 The fundamental dilemma of prioritizing between decentralization, security and scalability was named by the founder of the Ethereum blockchain “the scalability trilemma”. It states that at most, two of the three criteria can be fully met (Perboli et al. 2018).

5 Use Case In this section, an exemplary use case for smart contracts implemented into the procure-to-pay process is introduced. Using the example of international trade, it is demonstrated how smart contracts can simplify, automate, and shorten complex procure-to-pay processes and remove intermediaries. Firstly, the conventional process, as shown in Fig. 2, is demonstrated. Afterwards, smart contracts are implemented, and the proposed process, as shown in Fig. 3, is explained.

The technological features of the implementation are addressed, as well. Importer “I” buys goods from a foreign supplier “S”, that are delivered by a transportation service provider “T”. After determining the requirements and receiving the product catalog from “S”, “I” manually selects the vendor and places the purchase order. The delivery terms and business agreements are negotiated and agreed on, via traditional communication channels, such as e-mail and telephone.

Afterwards “I” requests a letter of credit from its bank “BI”, which is then issued to “BS”, the bank of “S”. After confirming the reception to “S”, the goods are handed over to “T” in exchange for a proof of shipment. Bank “BS” then pays “S” the agreed amount. After receiving the goods, “I” manually processes the invoice and orders “BI” to pay the agreed amount to “BS”. Finally, “I” must collect all necessary data for comprehensive reporting.

Ordering Requirement Importer I Supplier S Bank BI Asks for quotation Product Catalog Transportation & delivery Credit assurance Manual vendor selection Purchase order Provides Submits Product & invoice reception Invoice payment Prepare invoice processing Payable account Requests Receivable account Product delivery Sales order Receivable account Letter of credit Letter of credit Transportation Service Provider T Fig.

2 Conventional Procure-to-Pay process Manual preparation of reports Sends agreed amount Sends agreed amount Submits Bank BS Reporting Confirms Proof of shipment No reliable source of information Submits Product transportation Payable account Sends agreed amount Receivable account 18 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch Fig.

3 Proposed Procure-to-Pay process with Smart Contract Technology In addition to a large number of process steps, the parties in this example use a variety of different IT systems to handle internal processes and external communication. For monitoring of resources and planning of requirements, most companies use ERP systems, like the “SAP S/4 HANA”. Additionally, larger companies use specifically developed systems for data transfer and communication with external stakeholders.

At Daimler, for example, this system is called the “Daimler Supplier Portal” (Linke and Strahringer 2018). All goods receipts, payments and delivery information are, additionally handled by means of conventional communication, such as telephone and e-mail. The various IT Systems paired with a large number of steps, including many participants, make the procure-to-pay process heterogenic and complicated.

The goal of the implementation of smart contracts is to reduce the number of necessary participants, process steps, and actions for executing the procure-to-pay process. Figure 2 depicts the aspects of the process that may be replaced or automated with the use of blockchain-based smart contracts in grey. The banks “BI” and “BS” may no longer be vital, as well as the entire process of “credit assurance”.

Furthermore, several process steps may be automated, including “manual vendor selection”, “invoice processing”, several of the payment steps as well as the “manual preparation of reports”. The following section proposed the implementation of smart contract technology into the conventional procure-to-pay process. Figure 3 shows the new aspects of the proposed procure-to-pay process with the use of smart contract technology in grey.

The banks are replaced by a blockchain platform on which smart contracts are implemented. The blockchain acts as a distributed ledger for all parties to access and several smart contracts are implemented into that blockchain, executing “supply and demand matching”, “transparent tracking of shipped goods”, “automatic invoice processing and payment”, as well as “leaving a traceable audit trail”.

However, for the technology to be implemented in the procure-to-pay process, the various technological limitations of smart contracts and further restrictions must Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 19 be addressed. For external communication and processes, blockchain-technology offers excellent potential. However, for internal tasks, where trust between the participants is established, blockchain applications provide no significant advantage over traditional technology.

Therefore, these internal tasks should not be replaced by blockchain technology. However, this, in turn, has an impact on how blockchain applications must be designed. Most of the internal tasks are commonly performed by ERP systems, which link all company departments and function as common databases. For blockchains to be able to communicate with ERP systems and access off-chain data, appropriate software-connectors must be implemented.

The advantage of using software connectors is that neither the existing ERP system nor the blockchain needs to be adapted. Established ERP systems, like the “SAP S/4 HANA”, usually offer integrated connectors. In the case of a supplier-buyer network, closed consortium blockchains should be used. These blockchains are jointly managed by all participants, which increases the willingness to cooperate between companies.

The participants decide jointly which new members are admitted and which rules are to apply in the network. In order to achieve complete process automation, including invoice payments, the use of cryptocurrencies is advisable. A possible alternative would be to detach the invoice payment from the blockchain process and carry it out the conventional way. To increase data throughput and to keep data volume as small as possible, not all data should be stored on the blockchain.

Instead, the data should be saved locally on the companies’ servers, with only the hash values being stored on the blockchain. With these references, the companies can access the corresponding data and check their integrity. After the successful implementation of the smart contract, the proposed process is carried out as follows. To begin with, “I” submits its requirement and “S” his product catalog to the blockchain, where a smart contract matches the two.

Simultaneously, “I” can verify the authenticity and evaluate the supplier using the audit trail of past transactions. The contractual agreements are defined in a smart contract, which ensures the fulfillment of contractual clauses. After handing off the goods to “T”, IoT devices will continuously report the whereabouts and transportation conditions of the goods to the blockchain where the information is easily accessible. “I” has reliable information about the order.

After receiving the goods, the smart contract compares the order to the delivery and invoice data. The confirmation of the correctness of the transaction automatically triggers the smart contract to send the agreed amount to the account of the supplier while leaving a transparent and accessible audit trail for all involved parties to use for reporting. The example shows that smart contracts can help streamline processes. First and foremost, the banks “BI” and “BS” are no longer needed.

The blockchain provides the necessary security and trust between the two contractual partners “I” and “S”. Furthermore, through the implementation of self-enforcing smart contracts, unnecessary process steps are eliminated (e.g. request for quotation and letter of credit), and several remaining processes can be automated (e.g. vendor selection, invoice processing, and payment).

20 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch 6 Conclusions This paper examined the extent to which blockchain-based smart contracts are suitable for the application in the procure-to-pay process. To this end, the basic and operating principles of blockchain and smart contract technology were explained. The paper presented the potential benefits of the new technology for the procureto-pay process as well as technical limitations and recent advances in solving these challenges.

Based on a use case, it was shown that procure-to-pay processes could be optimized through smart contracts. With the use of smart contracts, it was possible to streamline the process, eliminate unnecessary intermediaries and process steps, and automate various tasks.

The connection of the digital with the real world in combination with the security mechanisms and the distributed storage of data leads to process automation, supply chain transparency, data security, and increased trust among all participants of the supply chain. In that way, smart contract technology goes beyond the sole automation of internal process steps as current procure-to-pay solutions (e.g. ERP systems).

However, it was determined that for smart contracts to be market-ready for the logistics industry, several challenges are yet to overcome. Technological limitations include limited scalability, poor transaction throughput, and high energy consumption. Approaches for overcoming these issues include external storage of data, alternative consensus protocols, and partial centralization of computing power.

Besides that, future research should focus on closing the gap between industry professionals and blockchain developers. Promising solutions are the usage of artificial intelligence, natural language processing, and human-readable code. The question of how blockchain technologies will replace or supplement existing systems, such as ERP systems and EDI communication, also needs to be clarified.

Future studies should focus on integrating legal, functional, and economic aspects of smart contracts to achieve a transdisciplinary understanding. References Allam Z (2019) On smart contracts and organisational performance: a review of smart contracts through the blockchain technology. Rev Econ Bus Stud 11(2):137–156. https://doi.org/10.1515/ rebs-2018-0079 Apptus (2018) Procurement: why blockchain may be the key to a bright future.

https://apttus.com/ blog/procurement-why-blockchain-may-be-the-key-to-a-bright-future/ Arnolds H, Heege F, Röh C, Tussing W (2010) Materialwirtschaft und einkauf—grundlagen— spezialthemen—übungen. Materialwirtschaft Und Einkauf, 464 https://doi.org/10.1524/978348 6592535 Badev A, Chen M (2014) Bitcoin: technical background and data analysis. FEDS Working Paper No.

2014–104, 7 October 2014. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2544331 Banerjee A (2018) Blockchain technology: supply chain insights from ERP. In: Advances in computers, vol 111. Academic Press Inc., pp 69–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.adcom.2018. 03.007 Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 21 Blockchain Bundesverband e.V (2017) Blockchain—chancen und herausforderungen einer neuen digitalen Infrastruktur für Deutschland.

https://bundesblock.de/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/bun desblock_positionspapier_v1.1.pdf Bocek T, Stiller B (2017) Smart contracts—blockchains in the wings. Digital marketplaces unleashed, pp 169–184. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49275-8_19 Bocek T, Rodrigues BB, Straser T, Stiller B (2017) Blockchains everywhere—a use-case of blockchains in the pharma supply-chain.

In: Proceedings of the im 2017−2017 IFIP/IEEE international symposium on integrated network management, Lisbon, Portugal, 8–12 May 2017 Bosch R, Penthin S (2018) Blockchain als treiber im modernen supply chain management 4.0. In: Bearingpoint.com. https://www.bearingpoint.com/files/Blockchain_im_SCM.pdf?dow nload=0&itemId=552008 Boschi AA, Borin R, Raimundo JC, Batocchio A (2018) An exploration of blockchain technology in supply chain management.

In: 22nd Cambridge international manufacturing symposium, 27–28 Brody P (2017) How blockchain is revolutionizing supply chain management. Ernst & young. https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-blockchain-and-the-supply-chainthree/$FILE/ey-blockchain-and-the-supply-chain-three.pdf Brown RG (2018) The corda platform: An introduction. Corda platform white paper, 1–21.

https:// www.corda.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/corda-platform-whitepaper.pdf Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik. (2019).Bundesamt für sicherheit in der informationstechnik (2019) Blockchain sicher gestalten. bundesamt für sicherheit in der informationstechnik, 98. https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Krypto/Blockchain_A nalyse.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=5 Cachin C (2016) Architecture of the hyperledger blockchain fabric.

In: Workshop in distributed cryptocurrencies and consensus ledgers, vol 70 2016. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.OPODIS. 2016.24 Camelot (2017) Blockchain and smart contracts: what´s in it for procurement organizations? Camelot.

https://www.camelot-mc.com/de/study/blockchain-and-smart-contracts-whats-in-forprocurement-organizations/ Capgemini (2019) Blockchain als erfolgsfaktor-auswirkungen blockchain als erfolgsfaktorauswirkungen der technologie auf den Beschaffungsprozess der Technologie auf den Beschaffungsprozess.

https://www.capgemini.com/de-de/2019/02/blockchain-als-erfolgsfaktor/ Casino F, Dasaklis TK, Patsakis C (2019) A systematic literature review of blockchain-based applications: Current status, classification and open issues. In: Telematics and informatics, vol 36. Elsevier Ltd, pp 55–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.11.006 Cockburn A (2000) Writing effective use cases.

3, 204. https://www.infor.uva.es/~mlaguna/is1/mat eriales/BookDraft1.pdf Cole R, Stevenson M, Aitken J (2019) Blockchain technology: implications for operations and supply chain management. Supply Chain Manag 24(4):469–483. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM09-2018-0309 Debono P (2019) Transforming public procurement contracts into smart contracts. Int J Inf Technol Proj Manag 10(2):16–28. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJITPM.2019040103 DeRose C (2016) Bankthink “smart contracts” are the future of blockchain.

https://www.americanb anker.com/opinion/smart-contracts-are-the-future-of-blockchain Deutsche Institut für Normung (2017) ISO/TC 307 Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies. https://www.iso.org/committee/6266604.html DHL & Accenture (2018) Blockchain in logistics: perspectives on the upcoming impact of blockchain technology and use cases for the logistics industry. In: DHL Customer Solutions & Innovation.

https://www.logistics.dhl/content/dam/dhl/global/core/documents/pdf/glocore-blockchain-trend-report.pdf Drescher D, Lenz G (2017) Blockchain Grundlagen: Eine Einführung in die elementaren Konzepte in 25 Schritten.

mitp Verlag 22 L. Trautmann and R. Lasch Eickemeyer SC, Halaszovich T, Lattemann C (2018) Blockchain technologies for ensuring material, information and monetary flows in logistics—success factors for the Chinese “Belt road initiative.” HMD Praxis Der Wirtschaftsinformatik 55(6):1260–1273. https://doi.org/10.1365/s40702018-00465-7 Fertig T, Schütz A (2019) Blockchain für entwickler—grundlagen, programmierung, Anwendung.

Rheinwerk Verlag Fiaidhi J, Mohammed S, Mohammed S (2018) EDI with blockchain as enabler for extreme automation. IT Professional. Guyonnet P (Accenture) Mohammed H (Accenture). (2016) How blockchain can bring greater value to procure-to-pay processes. In: Accenture. https://www.accenture.com/t20170103T20 0504Z__w__/us-en/_acnmedia/PDF-37/Accenture-How-Blockchain-Can-Bring-Greater-ValueProcure-to-Pay.pdf Hald KS, Kinra A (2019) How the blockchain enables and constrains supply chain performance.

Int J Phys Distrib Logistics Manag 49(4):376–397. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-02-2019-0063 Howard H, Schwarzkopf M, Madhavapeddy A, Crowcroft J (2015) Raft refloated: do we have consensus? ACM SIGOPS Operating Sys Rev 49(1):12–21. https://doi.org/10.1145/2723872. 2723876 International Organization for Standardization (2017) ISO/TC 307 Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies.

https://www.iso.org/committee/6266604.html Kitchenham B, Charters S (2007) Source: “Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in SE”, kitchenham et al guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software engineering. Kouhizadeh M, Saberi S, Sarkis J, Foisie RA (2018) Blockchain technology and sustainable supply chains. northeast decision science institute 2018 Annual conference, providence, Rhode Island, USA Laurence T (2017) Blockchain for dummies.

Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & CO, KGaA Linke D, Strahringer S (2018) Blockchain integration Within an ERP system for the procure-to-pay process: implementation of a prototype with SAP S/4HANA and hyperledger fabric in the daimler AG. HMD Praxis Der Wirtschaftsinformatik 55(6):1341–1359. https://doi.org/10.1365/s40702018-00472-8 Luu L, Chu DH, Olickel H, Saxena P, Hobor A (2016) Making smart contracts smarter.

In: Proceedings of the ACM conference on computer and communications security, 24–28, 254–269 October 2016. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978309 Meier A, Stormer H (2018) Blockchain = distributed ledger + consensusblockchain = distributed ledger + consensus. HMD Praxis Der Wirtschaftsinformatik 55(6):1139–1154. https://doi.org/ 10.1365/s40702-018-00457-7 Mik E (2017) Smart contracts: terminology, technical limitations and real world complexity. Law Innovation Technol 9(2):269–300.

https://doi.org/10.1080/17579961.2017.1378468 Mitschele A (2018) Blockchain- definition Mullender SJ (1993) Distributed Systems, 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley Nakamoto S (2008) Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. SSRN Electron J 1–9. https:// doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3440802 O’Leary DE (2017) Configuring blockchain architectures for transaction information in blockchain consortiums: the case of accounting and supply chain systems. Intell Sys Account Finance Manag 24(4):138–147.

https://doi.org/10.1002/isaf.1417 Pearson S, May D, Leontidis G, Swainson M, Brewer S, Bidaut L, Frey JG, Parr G, Maull R, Zisman A (2019) Are distributed ledger technologies the panacea for food traceability? In Global food security, vol 20. Elsevier B.V, pp 145–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.02.002 Perboli G, Musso S, Rosano M (2018) Blockchain in logistics and supply chain: a lean approach for designing real-world use cases. IEEE Access 6:62018–62028.

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACC ESS.2018.2875782 Prinz W, Schulte AT (2017) Blockchain und smart contracts—technologien, forschungsfragen und Anwendungen. Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, 50 Smart Contracts in the Context of Procure-to-Pay 23 Saberi S, Kouhizadeh M, Sarkis J, Shen L (2019) Blockchain technology and its relationships to sustainable supply chain management. Int J Prod Res 57(7):2117–2135.

https://doi.org/10.1080/ 00207543.2018.1533261 Schütte J, Fridgen G, Prinz W, Rose T, Urbach N, Hoeren T, Guggenberger N, Welzel C, Holly S, Schulte A, Sprenger P, Schwede C, Weimert B, Otto B, Dalheimer M, Harz M, Kreutzer M (2017) Blockchain- technologien, forschungsfragen und anwendungen. In Fraunhofer blockchain positionspapier (Issue Iml).

https://www.aisec.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/aisec/Dokumente/Pub likationen/Studien_TechReports/deutsch/FhG-Positionspapier-Blockchain.pdf Seuring S, Gold S (2012) Conducting content-analysis based literature reviews in supply chain management. Supply Chain Manag 17(5):544–555. https://doi.org/10.1108/13598541211258609 Stahlbock R, Heilig L, Voß S (2018) Blockchain technology in maritime logistics. HMD Praxis Der Wirtschaftsinformatik 55(6):1185–1203.

https://doi.org/10.1365/s40702-018-00464-8 Straube F, Junge AL, Grunow O (2018) Blockchain in der logistik—status quo und anwendungsbereiche. www.logistik.tu-berlin.de Szabo N (1994) Smart contracts, vol 40(4). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00287-017-1045-2 Tranfield D, Denyer D, Smart P (2003) Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means of systematic review.

British J Manag vom Brocke J, Simons A, Riemer K, Niehaves B, Plattfaut R, Cleven A (2015) Standing on the shoulders of giants: challenges and recommendations of literature search in information systems research. Commun Assoc Inf Sys 37:205–224. https://doi.org/10.17705/1cais.03709 Wang S, Ouyang L, Yuan Y, Ni X, Han X, Wang FY (2019) Blockchain-enabled smart contracts: architecture, applications, and future trends. IEEE Trans Sys Man Cybern Sys 49(11):2266–2277.

https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2019.2895123 Wang Y, Han JH, Beynon-Davies P (2019) Understanding blockchain technology for future supply chains: a systematic literature review and research agenda. Supply Chain Manag 24(1):62–84. Emerald Group Publishing Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2018-0148 Webster J, Watson RT (2002) Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing a literature review. MIS Q 26(2).

https://www.misq.org/misreview/announce.html Yoo M, Won Y (2018) A study on the transparent price tracing system in supply chain management based on blockchain. Sustain 10(11). (Switzerland). https://doi.org/10.3390/su10114037 Zheng Z, Xie S, Dai HN, Chen W, Chen X, Weng J, Imran M (2020) An overview on smart contracts: challenges, advances and platforms. Future Gener Comput Sys 105:475 491 https://doi.org/10.

1016/j.future.2019.12.019 Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce Arkadiusz Kawa Abstract According to the report Urban Logistics Opportunities-Last-Mile Innovation, prepared by Frost & Sullivan, expenditure on logistics in the world is expected to reach USD 10.6 trillion in 2020. 70% of these expenses will be generated by transport and as much as 40% by last mile deliveries.

In addition, there are many social costs associated with urban supplies−traffic jams, noise, pollution, etc. As a result, more and more logistics service companies and e-tailers are making changes to eliminate the effects of problems arising from deliveries to individual customers. These include both relatively easy organizational improvements and more complex solutions that require investment. One of them is out-of-home delivery.

The subject of out-of-home delivery in e-commerce is a relatively new research area. There are very few studies conducted on last mile so far have focused on alternative delivery methods, especially its impact on satisfaction and loyalty of e-customers. That is why the goals of this chapter are to identify the components of out-of-home delivery, and to present their influence on satisfaction and loyalty in e-commerce. The studies are empirical and are based on primary data.

CATI (computer-assisted telephone interview) was selected as a technique of information collection, which had been preceded by FGIs (focus group interviews). Keywords Last mile · E-commerce · Out-of-home delivery · PUDO · Parcel lockers 1 Introduction The Internet and its accompanying services have had a major impact not only on the society but also on the economy since the very beginning of their development. Recently, this impact has been increasingly noticeable.

Nowadays, more and more managers are indicating that the digital transformation is taking place in their companies. This applies to communication, sales and distribution channels. Digital A. Kawa (B) Poznan University of Economics and Business, al. Niepodległości 10, 61-875 Poznań, Poland e-mail: arkadiusz.kawa@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_2 25 26 A. Kawa and physical processes are increasingly intertwined, creating omni-channel systems. This is particularly evident in commerce, which is gradually moving to the Internet. The value of the world trade was USD 25.04 trillion in 2019. USD 3.54 trillion was generated by e-commerce, representing 14.1% of the total retail sales.

E-commerce is projected to grow to $6.54 trillion and will account for 22% of the total retail sales in 2023 (eMarketer Global Ecommerce 2019). Currently, almost all products that can be bought in stationary stores are sold via the Internet, such as: apparel, footwear, consumer electronics, books, movies, music & games, personal care products, furniture & homeware, household appliances, food & beverages, toys & baby products.

Due to the lack of geographical limitations, the possibilities of buying and selling are even greater, as almost everyone can be a customer. The only restriction is logistics, especially product delivery to the customer. It is not always possible to deliver a product to every place, because not all sellers offer such an option. E-commerce logistics is associated with many challenges.

Until the time of the dynamic development of e-commerce, CEP (courier, express and parcel) operators served mainly companies, i.e. the senders and recipients were businesses (B2B). Currently, a large proportion of shipments is sent to individual customers (B2C). The main difference between the two segments lies in the different time windows (time slots) (Faugere and Montreuil 2016) in deliveries to individuals and companies.

Very often, at the time of delivery, recipients are outside the indicated address, which may cause inconvenience to the courier company and generate higher costs. In addition, CEP operators frequently compete with each other with low prices. B2C also causes gradual cannibalisation of B2B—end customers skip middlemen. Another challenge for e-commerce logistics is the relatively high variability of demand (seasonality of demand, Christmas peak, accumulation of orders during the day, week, etc.)

and fragmentation of orders, which means frequent shipments of small batches of products. It is troublesome to send non-standard goods and difficult to deal with shipments incorrectly labelled by shippers, e.g. recipient’s wrong address, incorrect postal code, no phone number of the recipient. Online shopping has accustomed customers to convenience. They can look for products and order them anytime and anywhere.

They also have similar expectations in relation to the way they have their parcels delivered—they want to have influence on where and when they receive their e-shopping. In addition, this overlaps with the extended working time and an increasingly active lifestyle. Therefore, e-commerce and its operation have an impact on the logistics services. E-customers do not only want to receive the ordered product quickly and get free shipment, but also to pick it up at any place and time.

Most of the goods ordered via the Internet are delivered by courier to the indicated location. Door-to-door deliveries are not always convenient because either the customer has to wait for the courier at home or s/he is away when the courier tries to deliver. Therefore, alternative services have been created to solve this problem. These include late hour deliveries and pick-up and drop-off points, automatic parcel terminals (Kawa and Różycki 2018).

Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 27 Out-of-home delivery services are certainly more convenient for CEP operators because they reduce the last mile problem. They are therefore increasingly popular and promoted by e-commerce entities. However, a question arises whether customers are willing to use such services and whether they are satisfied with them. The subject of out-of-home delivery in e-commerce is a relatively new research area.

There have been very few studies conducted on the last mile so far, and they have focused on alternative delivery methods, especially their impact on satisfaction and loyalty of e-customers. That is why the goals of this chapter are to identify the components of out-of-home delivery, and to present their influence on satisfaction and loyalty in e-commerce. The studies are empirical and are based on primary data.

CATI (computer-assisted telephone interview) was selected as the technique of information collection, which had been preceded by FGIs (focus group interviews). The chapter consists of 9 sections. The structure of this chapter is as follows. The last mile issue is described in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3 the door-to-door delivery method is presented. Section 4 introduces out-of-home delivery method, especially parcel lockers and PUDO points.

The relationship between out-of-home delivery and customer satisfaction is outlined in Sect. 5. In Sect. 6 methodology of research (research stages, data gathering, and measures) are described. The analysis and results of research are discussed in Sect. 7. In Sect. 8 the development directions are given. Section 9 concludes the chapter and presents managerial implication, research limitations, and further research steps.

2 Last Mile At the beginning, the Internet was mainly used for cooperation between companies. As already mentioned, B2C transactions are now beginning to dominate e-commerce, where the product is ordered by individual customers and sent by businesses. In both B2B and B2C, the so-called last mile service emerges. It is the last stage in the transport of a parcel by courier to the place designated by the customer. Most often, the parcel goes to the customer’s place of residence or work.

The last mile is also called “the last leg of the delivery process from a regional depot to the recipient” (Orenstein et al. 2019) and “the final leg of the journey where a product lands in a consumer’s hands” (Capgemini 2019). The last mile is one of the most important phases of the online order process and is a critical touchpoint in the e-customer journey (Vakulenko et al. 2019) because that is when the only direct contact between the courier company and the recipient takes place.

The courier becomes a representative of the seller. This is often the weakest link in the supply chain—the service quality at the last stage is decided by the person who delivers the shipment on time and in the right condition, while logistics processes at other stages are automated and optimized. It is worth to add, however, that the last mile phenomenon is not only a feature of ecommerce.

It also includes supply from municipal warehouses or distribution centres 28 A. Kawa and transfers between branches. According to KennisDC Logistiek (2017), 80% of urban transports are currently performed by companies on their own, not by professional logistics service providers. This leads to lower efficiency in urban transport networks because of the lack of load consolidation from many senders. It creates many social costs associated with urban supplies−traffic jams, noise, pollution, etc.

(Kawa 2019a). Handing the last mile is the most difficult process in e-commerce logistics. Each parcel is first picked up by a courier from the warehouse and then delivered directly to the customer. As a result, about 100 parcels require almost the same number of repeated actions. What is important is that the courier still has to correctly identify the recipient’s address and set the delivery route accordingly, so that it is optimal.

In addition, the customer must be at home at that time to be able to pick it up. That is why the last mile is related to a significant part of the costs in the CEP industry (McKinsey 2016; Orenstein et al. 2019). According to the report Urban Logistics Opportunities—Last-Mile Innovation, prepared by Frost Sullivan (2017), expenditure on logistics in the world is expected to reach USD 10.6 trillion in 2020.

70 percent of these expenses will be generated by transport, and as much as 40 percent by last mile deliveries. That is why more and more logistics service companies and e-tailers are making changes to eliminate the effects of problems arising from deliveries to individual customers. These include both relatively easy organizational improvements and more complex solutions that require investment (Kawa 2019a).

Just like companies, local authorities are trying to reduce the negative effects of vehicle traffic, particularly in city centres (Sitek and Wikarek 2019). They regulate the principles of organizing the delivery of goods and courier shipments in selected areas of the city and indicate the types of vehicles and their drives. Restrictions apply to the times of the day in which deliveries can be made, and the time of loading and unloading goods (Kawa 2019a).

The key to success in the last mile is effective logistics solutions and good communication with the recipient. For example, according to the World Economic Forum, “advanced analytics and Internet of Things-based solutions such as load-pooling and dynamic re-routing could contribute to an overall scenario that reduces emission by 10%, unit cost by 30%, and congestion by 30%” (Vakulenko et al. 2019).

3 Door-to-Door Delivery Until a few years ago, products ordered via the Internet were delivered mainly by courier companies and postal operators. The dynamic development of e-commerce has made CEP services available to the public (mainly through courier brokers). The biggest advantages of courier services are the door-to-door system and short delivery time.

Neither the sender nor the recipient of the shipment have to go out to use this service (for this reason the service is more and more frequently treated as a premium). Delivery is usually made by the next working day. The disadvantages of this solution are quite high a price of the service, lack of information about the exact delivery date Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 29 and difficulties in determining the correct address, or the addressee’s absence.

The last problem is the biggest one. Some customers feel the stress of not being at home when a parcel is being delivered (Faugere and Montreuil 2016). That is why avoiding the need to synchronize with the courier is desirable for many recipients (Orenstein et al. 2019). This problem is solved by the customer indicating the workplace as the place of delivery. However, some employers do not allow parcels to be picked up at work due to the fact that these are private matters for employees.

The greatest problem, however, is that customers have to adapt their schedule to the wide window of delivery time and wait for the parcel at home (Faugere and Montreuil 2016). In the case of postal delivery, in turn, the biggest advantage is the price of the service. A disadvantage is longer time than in the case of courier deliveries and a lower level of customer service. In addition, parcels often must be collected from the post office, and these places are often crowded by other customers.

CEP operators undertake various actions to eliminate the effects of problems arising from deliveries to individual customers (Vakulenko et al. 2019). These include both relatively easy organizational improvements and more complex solutions that require investment. One solution is to send information to the recipient about an incoming shipment (Sitek and Wikarek 2019).

This allows the recipient to better prepare for the collection of the shipment, which increases the effectiveness of deliveries at the first attempt. Another solution that improves the final delivery stage is the possibility to pay for COD orders by card. An even better solution is to adjust the delivery time of shipments to the time when the recipient is present in the place of residence. Shipments to individual customers are therefore delivered in the afternoon and evening hours.

On the one hand, this reduces the number of undelivered shipments, but does not eliminate them completely, as some of the addressees are not present at the indicated place of delivery at that time, either. CEP operators also offer the possibility to manage the place and time of delivery. It is possible thanks to special IT tools designed to support interactive delivery management.

The customer receives information about the incoming shipment well in advance and can either redirect it to another location or change the delivery date, or select a delivery period to a specific address. Due to the fact that couriers need to service a large number of clients (mainly business) during the day, it is an expensive solution because it requires additional staff (Kawa and Różycki 2018). Another way is to enable the customer to dynamically change the place and time of pickup.

The customer receives information about the upcoming shipment in advance and redirects it to another place or delays its delivery. This increases the number of effective deliveries and reduces the number of empty runs. On the other hand, the option of changing the delivery time or adding a time window requires reorganization of the couriers’ work, which increases the operating costs of the CEP operator (Kawa 2019a).

30 A. Kawa 4 Out-of-Home Delivery The solution to the delivery problems related to the door-to-door system is out-ofhome (OOH) delivery. It consists in delivering a shipment to a point or machine that is in a convenient place for the customer. Such a parcel can be picked up on the customer’s commuting path at convenient time, within a time frame of some days (Faugere and Montreuil 2016). It allows to consolidate last mile shipments (Orenstein et al.

2019; Sitek and Wikarek 2019), which increases delivery efficiency and can reduce delivery costs. Resources (cars, couriers) and processes (dropping off more parcels at the same location decreases the number of stops required and eliminates unsuccessful deliveries due to an absent recipient) (Faugere and Montreuil 2016) are reduced. Moreover, both the delivery costs and the average delivery time are significantly decreased (Orenstein et al. 2019).

However, out-of-home delivery involves the customer in the last mile process. Customers must do some of the work that the courier normally does, i.e. they must go to the OOH point and pick up their parcels by themselves (Orenstein et al. 2019). OOH is most commonly found in two forms: parcel locker and PUDO (pick up drop off) point. Currently, they are some of the key trends in the last mile logistics.

They are also the fastest growing service and the most frequently chosen form of parcel delivery in China, Germany, Great Britain, France, Belgium and, also, in Poland. In the further part of the paper they are described in detail. Parcel Lockers An automated parcel machine (APM), or just a parcel locker, is a machine that is used to drop off and pick up parcels. Most often, it consists of several boxes.

Therefore, they are also referred to as secure locker banks which group reception box units (Businesswire 2019; Iwan et al. 2016). Lockers are interconnected with the hub and spokes system through the Internet of Things (Faugere and Montreuil 2016). Such devices are most often open 24/7 and are fully self-serviced, so they are also called unattended delivery (McKinsey 2016). They can be accessed via digital pickup codes, QR codes or a mobile application (Orenstein et al. 2019).

Such machines are usually located in easily accessible places and highly frequented areas, such as public premises, public transit stations, public locations in living neighbourhoods (Faugere and Montreuil 2016), e.g. at train or bus stations, gas stations (Orenstein et al. 2019). An advantage of this solution is that the customer can indicate a convenient location and pick up the shipment at any time, so it is a good solution for customers who are more mobile, flexible and want to have freedom.

For this reason, they are called “born out of the frustration of failed deliveries to shoppers who aren’t home” (Orenstein et al. 2019). A disadvantage is that the customer has to bother to go to such a point, and so “to make the final leg of the journey” (Iwan et al. 2016). There are also limitations in terms of size, shape and weight of shipments. In addition, there are no or relatively few facilities of this kind in rural or less populated areas.

This can be an obstacle for people who are unable to collect the parcel, e.g. Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 31 because of their disabilities. There is also a problem with larger goods, such as refrigerators, washing machines, garden equipment and tires. Parcel machines restrict the weight and dimensions of a shipment. Large products are still delivered directly to the address indicated (Kawa 2019b).

Delivery services to parcel lockers are provided by both CEP operators (e.g. DHL PackStation in Germany, InPost in Poland), marketplaces (Amazon, JD.com) and independent companies (Hive Box, SwipBox). In this case, the last mile service is much easier and cheaper for the CEP operator. The courier transports a lot of parcels at one time and delivers them to one specific location (Kawa 2019b). More and more often, parcel lockers are equipped with new functions.

For example, they can be used for cash on delivery, to withdraw money (ATM function), charge a car or scooter (e.g. InPost), pick up groceries (automated food locker by Cleveron). For this reason, they are also called smart lockers terminals (Faugere and Montreuil 2016). Parcel lockers usually have an on-line connection to the system of the network operator and update information when the status of a parcel changes (delivered, waiting for pickup, collected).

Thanks to that, it is possible to track which lockers are empty or full (Businesswire 2019). Apart from parcel lockers, there are other solutions that have a similar function.

These are: a reception box—a locker which is permanently fixed to the wall outside the customer’s house; a delivery box—a box of goods temporarily attached to the wall of the customer’s house, which is accessible by means of a lock; controlled access systems—a solution that allows the courier to access a closed area in order to leave the goods inside, e.g. in a garage, car trunk (Iwan et al. 2016). In addition to convenience, the benefits for companies and the environment are also important.

According to the World Economic Forum, they can “reduce delivery costs by 2–12% and, at the same time, ease congestion by 5–18%” (World Economic Forum 2020). PUDO Points PUDO are special points where one can drop off or pick up parcels. These points are located in places that are relatively easy to access and that are regularly visited by customers. They often have long opening hours (Iwan et al.

2016) and they are near the recipient’s home or office address, or in the recipient’s favourite shopping mall (Orenstein et al. 2019). Special points are located in places such as grocery stores, newsagent’s, traffic kiosks, shopping malls and gas stations (Kawa 2019a). This service originated from the click & collect concept, which was initially developed by companies trading mainly in fixed locations (e.g. retail chains), but gradually moving part of their sales to the Internet.

Thanks to it, customers did not have to wait for the courier and pay for the delivery (Kawa and Różycki 2018). The points where one can pick up and send a parcel are not a new solution. Such places existed much earlier, and they were post offices. It was only a few years ago that CEP companies, which had problems with undelivered parcels to individual customers, noticed them. 32 A. Kawa PUDO eliminates problems related to determining the correct address or the recipient’s absence from home.

Using this type of delivery is really simple. When shopping on the Internet, it is enough to select the appropriate point in the area and pick up the shipment there later. When choosing a point, the customer pays attention to the distance from the place of residence or work, so the density and distribution of the facilities are important, too (Kawa and Różycki 2018).

Currently, there is a very strong trend towards the development of the PUDO service, which is why CEP operators continue to expand their network of points independently and through external partners. They promote it as convenient for the customers—they can pick up or send a shipment at a chosen place and time. Due to greater consolidation of shipments, the cost of delivery to the points of sending or collecting a parcel is lower than the cost of door-to-door courier services.

However, this does not always mean a lower price for the customer. Some shipments are redirected after the courier cannot effectively deliver the package to the addressee, and some go directly to the PUDO points. This creates the cost of the delivery to the points and the cost of handling shipments at those points. Yet, because of the growing costs of the last mile (mainly due to rising labour costs), the differences between the prices of direct delivery and that to the points will keep increasing.

A drawback of PUDO is the limitation of the service availability through the opening hours of the points, which has become an impulse to automate the service on the basis of the previously described self-service terminals offering 24-h access. PUDO is characterized by, similarly to parcel lockers, limitations on size, weight, etc. of the shipments to be accepted. Most points are available through only one operator. This means that the customer cannot pick up all products in one place.

For this reason, agnostic networks that include multi-brand services are needed. In such points customers can pick up and drop off parcels from different CEP operators. However, this requires cooperation between competitors (World Economic Forum 2020). The pick up and drop off points are also a very effective solution for the CEP operators and online retailers, as they involve fewer questions from recipients who automatically receive information about the status of their shipment.

They also reduce the number of undelivered shipments due to the recipient’s absence. PUDO points can be successfully used for returns. Recipients can easily and cheaply, and sometimes even free of charge (depending on the seller’s offer), send back the product (Kawa and Różycki 2018). As the OOH network develops, CEP operators expand their services by opening special points.

For example, the DPD Pickup’s and GLS’s offer includes many additional services, including shipment insurance, international shipping and cash on delivery. Customers who buy clothes or shoes online can try their order on in the dressing room and return it immediately, if necessary.

Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 33 5 Out-of-Home Delivery and Customer Satisfaction A network of PUDO points and parcel lockers is currently an important element in the development of CEP operators and e-commerce companies. This is related to the growing challenges for city logistics and the requirements of city residents.

On the one hand, this solution reduces the volume of courier traffic in cities, and on the other hand, it gives the customer the freedom to decide how and when to collect his/her order sent from the online store. The operators’ priority is to give their customers the greatest convenience and flexibility possible in using courier services and the possibility to choose between deliveries: to their own hands, to their home, workplace, parcel locker or PUDO point.

This makes the customer shopping online more satisfied (Faugere and Montreuil 2016), and causes a feeling that the e-tailer understands their needs, which later leads to recommendation to buy at a specific shop. On the basis of the above considerations, the following hypothesis has been formulated: H1: The out-of-home delivery has a positive impact on customer satisfaction in e-commerce. Numerous studies show that customer satisfaction leads to increased customer loyalty (Cyr 2008).

If a customer is satisfied with their online shopping, it is very likely that they will buy this product again or choose the same seller the next time. This observation leads to another research hypothesis: H2: Customer satisfaction has a positive impact on loyalty in e-commerce. The out-of-home delivery can directly affect the loyalty variable.

Therefore, a research hypothesis has been put forward which is as follows: H3: The out-of-home delivery has a positive impact on customer loyalty in ecommerce. 6 Methodology of Research Research Stages In this study, a quantitative method was used to investigate the dependencies between out-of-home deliveries and customer satisfaction and loyalty.

It was preceded by an in-depth literature analysis, presented in the previous parts of this paper, which was used to prepare a qualitative method for the research. Using this method was aimed at preliminary analysis of the problem of the last mile in e-commerce and providing information necessary for proper organization of the research with the quantitative method, including first of all designing the measuring instrument (questionnaire).

A focus group interview (FGI) was chosen as the research technique. The selection of respondents for the study was purposeful. The results of these interviews (Kawa 34 A. Kawa et al. 2019) have become the basis for the preparation of the next step of research— study of online retailers with the use of quantitative research. A tool in the form of a questionnaire was created.

Data Gathering In the third stage of the research, both computer-assisted web interviews (CAWI) and computer-assisted telephone interviews (CATI) were applied. The investigation was carried out between November 2017 and May 2018 by a research agency. The database of polish online retailers was the sample of the study. Approx. 6 thousand representatives of online retailers were invited to take part in the investigation with usage of non-random purposeful sampling.

It was 20% of the total population of e-tailers in Poland. A restrictive condition, as in the FGI, was that each participant in the interview had to conduct selling activity on the Internet for at least one year as a necessary condition. A return ratio was 10%. We received 592 correctly filled questionnaires—392 interviews from CAWI and 200 from CATI. This sample is sufficient to generalise our results for the entire population of the polish e-tailers.

An acceptable margin of error is 3.99% with assumption that the confidence level is 95% and the response distribution is 50%. Measures Three constructs (latent variables) were distinguished in this research: out-of-home delivery, customer satisfaction and loyalty. Based on an in-depth literature analysis and results of focus group interview, the items of these variables have been developed. They have been included in the questionnaire in the form of statements.

The respondents evaluated these statements with the use of a five-point Likert scale. In the case of the loyalty measure, the respondents were asked to compare their parameters with those of other online retailers. Out-of-home delivery was measured by the possibilities of picking up goods ordered via the Internet (excluding door-to-door deliveries). Customers can buy products from online sellers who offer deliveries to PUDO points, self-service terminals (e.g.

parcel lockers), as well as the click & collect solution. Satisfaction was related to the customer’s happiness with their purchases, their feeling that the seller understood their needs and that they would recommend purchasing from the same seller to their family or friends. Loyalty, in turn, referred to buying again from the same seller in the near future, even if the conditions changed, i.e. the products, their delivery and payments offered by other vendors would be more competitive (Cyr 2008).

With the results of the interviews, the exploratory factor analysis was used in order to find the indicators with the highest loading values. The validity and reliability analysis by the Cronbach’s α method has been used for this purpose. All Cronbach’s α were above 0.7, indicating satisfactory internal consistency of variables (see Table 1).

Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 35 Table 1 Constructs, items and scales of the out-of-home delivery, customer satisfaction and loyalty variables Out-of-home (OOH) delivery Cronbach’s alpha =0.74 • Customers buy from online sellers who offer deliveries to PUDO (pick up drop off) points (e.g. a traffic kiosk. gas station) • Customers buy from online sellers who offer deliveries to self-service terminals (e.g.

parcel locker) • Customers buy from online sellers who offer click & collect solution Customer satisfaction Cronbach’s alpha =0.78 • Customers are satisfied with their purchases Customers will buy again at my shop in the near future • Customers feel that we understand their needs • Customers will recommend buying at my shop to their nearest and dearest Customer loyalty Cronbach’s alpha =0.81 • Customers will continue to buy with them.

even if the products offered by other online retailers are more competitive • Customers will continue to buy with them. even if the delivery of products offered by other online retailers will be more competitive • Customers will continue to buy with them.

even if payments for products offered by other online retailers are more competitive Source own elaboration 7 Analysis and Results We analysed the data using one of the statistical measures—Pearson’s correlation coefficient, which is particularly appropriate for testing hypotheses. In this way, it was possible to confirm that the correlations were not accidental and allowed to generalise the results of the conducted tests with a sufficiently high degree of probability (Kawa 2019b).

The empirical models include out-of-home delivery (OOH), satisfaction, and loyalty variables, and the interaction between them. Table 2 reports means, standard deviation, and Pearson’s correlation coefficients for all variables used in this study. Our empirical testing has shown that all hypotheses have been supported (see Fig. 1). The out-of-home delivery has a positive influence on the satisfaction and the loyalty variables.

These correlations have been statistically significant but not too Table 2 Descriptive statistics Variable Mean S.D 1. OOH delivery 3.62 1.11 2. Satisfaction 4.01 0.92 3. Loyalty 3.27 1.13 ** p < 0.01; N = 592 Source own elaboration 1 2 3 0.17* 0.134* 0.444* 36 A. Kawa Fig. 1 Confirmed correlations between the out-of-home delivery, customer satisfaction and loyalty variables **p < .01. Source own elaboration strong.

The strongest statistically significant relationship has been found between the satisfaction and the loyalty variables. The research conducted has confirmed that delivering the right value to the customers increases their satisfaction, which in turn translates into customer loyalty and, further, into repurchasing (Chiou and pan 2009; Chiu et al. 2009; Vakulenko et al. 2019). So, deliveries in e-commerce are a very important component of value for the customer.

It means that the more attention a customer pays to out-of-home delivery, “the more satisfaction they get from shopping and the more loyal they are, and thus the more they spend on shopping” (Kawa 2019b). Consequently, the sellers of goods who take alternative deliveries seriously can expect better performance than their competitors.

It is important that the out-of-home solutions are created by entities supporting ecommerce and providing complementary services, such as logistics, or parcel service. This means that all e-commerce stakeholders should pay special attention to the issue of alternative ways of deliveries, because creating value from them for the customer will bring them benefits.

The results and conclusions are very important from a scientific perspective, because the impact of the out-of-home delivery on the customer satisfaction and loyalty, in particular in e-commerce, is rarely mentioned in the literature (Kawa 2019b). Out-of-home deliveries are not only PUDOs in the form of traditional points and parcel lockers, but include many other solutions that various e-commerce stakeholders are working on.

An interesting idea is personal parcel boxes, which can be located at the place of residence. They fulfil a function similar to traditional mailboxes, but have greater capacity. Thanks to them, the courier or postman can leave a parcel in the box, even if the customer is not at home. The customer can also send a parcel.

The box combines the advantages of courier deliveries (delivery to the door) with those of automatic parcel lockers (possibility to pick up the package at any Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 37 time). The parcel box can also handle returns. For the time being, such solutions are mainly in the phase of testing or initial development, but in a few years’ time they may become widespread, especially in the case of detached and terraced houses.

Another way to deal with the last mile problem is to use cars as mobile PUDOs. When ordering products, the customer indicates his/her vehicle as the place of delivery. The courier uses a disposable digital key to open the trunk and place the package in it. Then, information about the delivery is sent to the customer. Such solutions are tested or applied by retailers (Amazon), car manufacturers (Volvo, BMW, Audi) and CEP operators (DHL).

Similarly, a parcel can be left in a specific part of the house (e.g. garage). 8 Development Directions The question about the direction in which alternative means of delivering products ordered over the Internet will develop is very difficult to answer unequivocally. Until a few years ago, PUDO was used marginally and parcel lockers were at an early stage of development. Today, it is difficult to imagine trading over the Internet without them.

However, new disruptive solutions may appear which will replace the previous ones. The role of independent integrators is likely to increase in the near future. They will consolidate the services of different entities in one place according to the one stop shopping concept. In addition to the CEP operators, whose domain will be transporting parcels from point A to point B, entities that will offer competence in sending and receiving parcels will be very important.

This is not only about the physical points, but also about technology companies that will provide effective solutions for the integration of many partners and the flow of information between them. Co-opetitive activities, i.e. cooperation between competitors, may also develop in order to reduce costs and compete together for e-customers. A number of solutions based on automation, autonomy and robotisation (drones, robots, autonomous vehicle deliveries with parcel lockers, etc.)

(McKinsey 2016) are currently being tested which are very important in the context of the last mile challenges, but they mainly concern door-to-door deliveries. Undoubtedly, such solutions automate the process of parcel delivery to a customer, but it is difficult to imagine that they will be used on a massive scale. Every day, millions of parcels are delivered and all cannot be transported by drones or robots.

So they are used for urgent deliveries, in hard-to-reach places and where there is a low density of recipients. In addition, in many countries there are legal restrictions, e.g. flight at a certain height under human supervision (Kawa 2019a). These solutions are also widely described in the literature, e.g. (Vakulenko et al. 2019), just as using the concept of sharing economics, in particular crowdsourcing.

The society and its resources are involved in the delivery of consignment services (Kawa 2019a). However, these are solutions to the problems of door-to-door deliveries, which are not covered by this article. 38 A. Kawa 9 Conclusions The Internet has not only revolutionised trade but has also had a major impact on logistics. It is now one of the key factors in the development of logistics companies, in particular CEP operators.

More and more people buy things online, and that translates into the number of shipments that have to be delivered to the final recipient. The issue of the last mile, which appears at the last stage of the logistics process, is becoming particularly important. Most often, shipments are delivered by door-todoor couriers. As it was shown in the article, this type of delivery is not effective. Hence, out-of-home deliveries are very helpful.

Deliveries to PUDOs and parcel lockers are characterized by flexibility of the delivery place and date. When e-shopping, this is undoubtedly an additional argument for customers who are more mobile and want to be free to choose the place and time of delivery. Unfortunately, this can be an obstacle for those who need to go a long way to such a point, e.g. living in rural, less populated areas or not being able to pick up the parcel.

For some customers, the door-to-door courier service will still remain most convenient and reliable. There is also a problem with larger goods such as refrigerators, washing machines, garden equipment, and tyres. PUDOs and parcel lockers obviously limit the weight and dimensions of a potential shipment. Large products are still delivered directly to the indicated address. For the purpose of this study, interviews were conducted with 592 online retailers.

The hypothesis that the out-of-home delivery has a positive impact on customer satisfaction in e-commerce has been confirmed. The customer satisfaction has a positive impact on loyalty in e-commerce. There is also a direct relationship between the out-of-home delivery and loyalty. It leads to the managerial implication that greater attention to out-of-home delivery in e-commerce resulted in greater customer satisfaction, and, in turn, in influence on customer loyalty.

Managers representing online sellers should offer alternative forms of delivery options (not only courier services). It leads to a greater sense of control by customers choosing the best delivery option for them and to good experiences in the whole process of online shopping (World Economic Forum 2020). The presented research has both methodical and substantive limitations.

The approach developed for the needs of the paper aimed to identify universal dependencies between delivery methods, customer satisfaction and loyalty. However, such an intention may result in disregarding other aspects of the impact on customer satisfaction and loyalty, such as delivery monitoring, time of delivery. Inclusion thereof may be a future direction of research, leading to an increase in the substantive value of the approach.

The limitation of the methodological nature of this study is the essence of the approach itself, which simplifies the economic reality and thus reduces the complexity of the actual state. The development of the PUDO points and parcel lockers is undoubtedly one of the most important trends in the CEP industry.

It can be assumed that their popularity will increase with the development of e-commerce; new solutions will emerge, and they will slowly displace courier services, which will become premium services over Out-of-Home Delivery as a Solution of the Last Mile Problem in E-commerce 39 time. Surcharges for delivery of parcels to the customer’s door are more and more often discussed. This trend is worth observing.

Therefore, future work can embrace a rerun of this study with the addition of new forms of out-of-home deliveries. Acknowledgements This paper has been written with financial support of the National Centre of Science [Narodowe Centrum Nauki]—grant number DEC-2015/19/B/HS4/02287. References Businesswire (2019). Global parcel locker systems market insight Report 2018. https://www. businesswire.com/news/home/20190718005526/en/Global-Parcel-Locker-Systems-Market-Ins ight-Report Capgemini (2019).

The last-mile delivery challenge. https://www.capgemini.com/wp-content/upl oads/2019/01/Report-Digital-%E2%80%93-Last-Mile-Delivery-Challenge1.pdf Chiou J-S, Pan L-Y (2009) Antecedents of internet retailing loyalty: differences between heavy versus light shoppers. J Bus Psychol 24:327–339 Chiu C-M, Lin H-Y, Sun S-Y, Hsu M-H (2009) Understanding customers’ loyalty intentions towards online shopping: an integration of technology acceptance model and fairness theory.

Behav Inf Technol 28(4):347–360 Cyr D (2008) Modeling web site design across cultures: relationships to trust, satisfaction, and e-loyalty. J Manag Inf Syst 24(4):47–72 eMarketer, Global Ecommerce (2019) Ecommerce continues strong gains amid global economic uncertainty. https://www.emarketer.com/content/global-ecommerce-2019 Faugere L, Montreuil B (2016) Hyperconnected city logistics: smart lockers terminals & last mile delivery networks.

In: Proceedings of the 3rd international physical internet conference, Atlanta, GA, vol 29. USA Frost, Sullivan (2017) Urban logistics opportunities−last-mile innovation. https://store.frost.com/ urban-logistics-opportunities-last-mile-innovation.html Iwan S, Kijewska K, Lemke J (2016) Analysis of parcel lockers’ efficiency as the last mile delivery solution–the results of the research in Poland. Transp Res Procedia 12:644–655 Kawa A (2019a) Last mile logistics. in technological revolution.

directions in the development of the transport-forwarding-logistics sector. https://pitd.org.pl/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/PITDReport-technological-revolution-directions-in-the-development-of-the-transport-forwardinglogistics-sector.pdf, pp 76–79 Kawa A (2019b) Returns in e-commerce as a value for customers from different perspectives. Bus. Logistics Mod. Manag. 19 43–58 Kawa A, Różycki M (2018) PUDO, czyli jak ułatwić klientom nadawanie i odbieranie przesyłek?

Magazyn e-Commerce, 2 Kawa A, Pierański B, Zdrenka W (2019) Wartość dla klienta z perspektywy sprzedawców internetowych–wyniki badań z wykorzystaniem FGI. Gospodarka Materiałowa I Logistyka 3:33–40 KennisDC Logistiek (2017) The future of last mile delivery: 10 most important trends https://www. kennisdclogistiek.nl/nieuws/the-future-of-last-mile-delivery-10-most-important-trends McKinsey (2016) Parcel delivery. The future of last mile.

https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mck insey/industries/travel%20transport%20and%20logistics/our%20insights/how%20customer% 20demands%20are%20reshaping%20last%20mile%20delivery/parcel_delivery_the_future_of_ last_mile.ashx. Orenstein I, Raviv T, Sadan E (2019) Flexible parcel delivery to automated parcel lockers: models, solution methods and analysis.

EURO J Transp Logistics 8(5):683–711 40 A. Kawa Sitek P, Wikarek J (2019) Capacitated vehicle routing problem with pick-up and alternative delivery (CVRPPAD): model and implementation using hybrid approach. Ann Oper Res 273(1–2):257– 277 Vakulenko Y, Shams P, Hellström D, Hjort K (2019) Service innovation in e-commerce last mile delivery: mapping the e-customer journey. J Bus Res 101:461–468 World Economic Forum (2020), The future of the last-mile ecosystem.

https://www3.weforum.org/ docs/WEF_Future_of_the_last_mile_ecosystem.pdf Evaluation and Control of a Collaborative Automated Picking System Mathias Rieder and Richard Verbeet Abstract Picking is a core process of logistics. The challenge of acquiring personnel for operations and handling steadily changing product ranges can be tackled by partwise automated picking systems to create a cooperative working environment for human pickers and picking robots.

This chapter is motivated to enable a stepwise transformation from manual picking to highly automated picking processes by cooperative and learning robots. The main goal is to guarantee reliable order fulfilment by implementation of a feedback-loop between humans and robots for error handling and to gather data for machine learning algorithms to increase the performance of object detection.

In this chapter a concept for measurement and evaluation of system performance is introduced ensuring successful processing of picking orders and training of picking robots to improve their ability for object detection. It is based on the amount of picking orders, the picking capacity of humans and robots, and the probability for successful automated order picking considering the training effort during system design.

The proposed concept can be used for overall capacity planning as well as for operational control of picking processes. 1 Introduction Modern supply chains are challenged by an increasing complexity and short product life cycles. Therefore, picking as central logistic process during order fulfilment must adapt to changing product ranges. Another rising challenge is the lack of personnel for manual picking processes.

Therefore, automated picking systems handling steadily a changing product range become more and more important. In recent years, using technical progresses in robotics general concepts for automated picking are developed (Zou et al. 2019; Krug et al. 2016) or applied for specific use cases (Mester and Wahl M. Rieder (B) · R. Verbeet Ulm University of Applied Sciences, Prittwitzstr.

10, 89075 Ulm, Germany e-mail: mathias.rieder@thu.de R. Verbeet e-mail: richard.verbeet@thu.de © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_3 41 42 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet 2019).

Thereby, the general concepts focus on automation of movement or manipulation of objects and not on an integrated handling of heterogenous and dynamic article ranges. Verbeet et al. (2019) propose a cooperative picking system to guarantee reliable automated picking by robots realized by a feedback-loop improving robots’ ability for object detection by human support.

Classic methods for capacity planning and performance evaluation to control and design must be extended for partwise automated systems. The adaptive process model proposed by Verbeet et al. (2019) for a proposed cooperative picking system considers humans to support robots in addition to their normal workload to enable the learning process.

In this system, not successful object detection during picking is the start of a learning process and therefore desired if overall order fulfilment is still guaranteed. The system is to be designed in such a way that all picking orders are completed, and the capacity of humans and robots is utilized. Furthermore, picking robots should reach their performance limits to trigger the proposed cooperative learning process to increase the picking performance of the whole system in the long term.

This chapter introduces a concept to calculate such an equilibrium of capacity for a partial automated picking system based on the adaptive process model. The calculation can be used to carry out a general capacity assessment based on available capacities and a pool of picking orders while allocating these picking orders to human pickers and robots by mathematical optimization.

The overall system efficiency of picking robots’ ability for object detection can be evaluated by an average probability − for a successful object detection. For this, the threshold PBreak is calculated defining an average value for successful object detection of a single article. The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In the second chapter, related work from the fields of existing robotic picking systems as well as planning and evaluation of order picking systems is discussed.

This review shows the lack of a concept considering capacity during evaluation and design of cooperative partwise automated picking systems. The adaptive process model for an automated cooperative picking system is described in the third chapter. The fourth chapter proposes evaluation concepts for overall capacity planning, a preselection for order assignment and a calculation approach of a capacity-based working point.

These concepts are discussed in fifth chapter and in the final chapter this paper is closed by a conclusion containing a brief summary and further research. 2 Related Work Grosse et al.

(2017) mention the following planning problems for picking systems: layout design (structure and dimension of shelfs), storage assignment (allocation of items to storage positions), zoning (assignment of working area to pickers), order batching (consolidation or splitting of picking orders), routing (sequence of picking Collaborative Automated Picking 43 positions and routing), and technical equipment (supporting equipment). In this paper, the problem of order assignment is added.

Many research activities focus on batching, sequencing and routing in order picking systems with multiple pickers (Scholz et al. 2017) and Chabot (2018) shows order picking is influenced most by facility layout, storage assignment policy and routing strategy. Jane and Laih (2005) improve utilization and completion time of a synchronized zone manual order picking system by a heuristic solving a natural cluster model.

Yu and de Koster (2009) define order batching and zoning of the picking area using a queuing network approximation model. Bukchin et al. (2012) batch orders in a dynamic finite-horizon environment to minimize order tardiness and overtime costs of pickers using a Markov decision process-based approach to set an optimal decision-making policy. Lin et al. (2016) use Particle Swarm Optimization to solve the problems of order batching and picker routing. Zhang et al.

(2017) present an approach to solve the on-line order batching and sequencing problem with multiple (manual) pickers using a hybrid rule-based algorithm minimizing turnover time (completion time of an order). In addition, they present a review about previous work about order batching. Pinto and Nagano (2020) solve the Optimized Billing Sequencing (order fulfilment) and Optimized Picking Sequence (batching, route planning) problems by combination of two genetic algorithms.

Valle and Beasley (2019) discuss approaches using queueing theory, simulation, mathematical optimization and heuristics for system analysis, design optimization, and operations planning and control. Henn (2015) is considering order assignment. The task of order assignment is strongly connected to workload balancing. In fast picking environments demand cannot be taken as known resulting in the requirement of shorter execution times of picking orders and a dynamic workload balancing (de Koster et al.

2007). Vanheusden et al. (2017) show a necessity to balance workload within a picking system not only in long-term range but also within a day or during a shift due to the steady rising requirement of flexibility. A reliable forecast is necessary to balance workload. van Gils et al. (2017) provide an overview of various time series forecasting models for predicting the workload within a picking system and indicators for measurement of accuracy of forecasting results.

In van Gils (2019) different planning problems considering various real-life features to match demand and resource allocation are combined. Tu et al. (2019) focus on workload balancing within an order picking system by storage assignment. Merschformann et al. (2018) show that order assignment has the major impact on throughput of a picking system using a robotic transport system. Chen et al.

(2017) combine different strategies of order sequencing, order release and storage assignment to balance workload and capacity. Molnár (2004) suggests an integrated concept for planning a picking system by a genetic algorithm solving a constraint programming model followed by a simulation to estimate the number of pickers and picking schedule considering time constraints while minimizing total costs.

Hwang and Cho (2006) plan a warehouse by minimizing costs considering throughput and storage space with a concept to measure travel time of transporters for manual picking and using a simulation model to define the necessary number of transporters. Seyedrezaei et al. (2012) present a dynamic 44 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet mathematical model for the order picking planning problem maximizing order fulfilment considering product life, customer importance, probabilistic demand, and backorder strategy.

Kłodawski and Jachimowski (2013) propose a concept for using an ant algorithm for planning a picking system considering various parameters but doesn’t provide a definition for an evaluation function. A mechanism to evaluate a picking system is the basis for planning and operational decisions. A qualitative approach for evaluation of a picking system is a Balanced Scorecard (Heine and Wenzel 2013).

In contrast, VDI describes more than 350 KPIs for a quantitative evaluation of logistics processes (VDI 2007). Many quantitative concepts evaluate a picking system’s performance by order fulfilment. Chabot (2018) uses order lead time for evaluation. Gong et al. (2010) define a framework to evaluate different storage and order picking policies by a DEA model considering total costs and service level. Brynzér et al.

(1994) present an evaluation methodology using zero-based analysing of manual picking processes. Dallari et al. (2009) describe a design methodology for picking systems measuring performance by response time, picking rate and number of pickers. Pan and Wu (2012) evaluate the efficiency of a multi-picker system by estimation of the number of picking items per time to avoid inaccuracies during measurement of travel distance or travel time due to congestion.

Yu and de Koster (2009) use mean throughput time of an arbitrary order as measurement of efficiency. Lamballais et al. (2017) evaluate the performance of a Robotic Mobile Fulfilment System (RMFS) that realizes a parts-to-picker environment by measuring maximum order throughput, robot utilization, and order cycle time. Hwang and Cho (2006) evaluate a system by transportation time of transporters for manual picking.

The mathematical concepts mentioned so far mainly minimize used time and travelled distance. Grosse et al. (2017) point out time to be still the most important indicator to evaluate the outcome of an order picking system. A review presented by Gu et al. (2010) shows amongst others the evaluation of performance by analytic models considering travel time or service time. Jane and Laih (2005) measure the improvement of completion time, Bukchin et al. (2012) use a measurement by slack, i.e.

comparison of an order’s picking time and its remaining time to supply. Zou et al. (2019) minimize the total time needed to pick items of an order. Manzini et al. (2007) evaluate performance of order picking by travel distance. Hsieh and Huang (2011) show how strategies of storage assignment, order batching and picker routing affect the overall performance also measured by travel distance Lin et al. (2016). measure the total picker routing distance. In Hernandez et al.

(2017) the evaluated metrics are travel distance and travel time and Pinto and Nagano (2020) also combine these metrics by maximizing order portfolio billing and minimizing total picking time and travel distance. In Seyedrezaei et al. (2012) the degree of order fulfilment is maximized. Hanson et al.

(2018) and Jaghbeer (2019) mention the categories throughput, order lead time, availability, flexibility, quality, training time, resource utilization, costs, and ergonomics to evaluate performance of robotic picking systems. Jaghbeer (2019) states no studies using these categories for robot-to-parts picking systems exist. Even considering further technical and conceptual progress in automated picking, Collaborative Automated Picking 45 robots will depend on humans in order picking systems.

Therefore, an efficient setup of an operational human–robot picking system needs a reliable human–machineinteraction (Azadeh et al. 2017). Bonini et al. (2019) propose a method to distribute various tasks among humans and robots within a warehouse to use synergies in human–machine-interaction.

Hoffman (2019) describes the successful coordination of humans and robots as robot collaborative fluency measured by specific metrics for idle time for humans and robots each, concurrent activity, functional delay, and interaction between objectives. Within RMFS a lot of research about cooperation of transport robots delivering shelfs with articles to pickers located at static picking stations exists (Zou et al. 2019; Valle & Beasley 2019; Hanson et al. 2018).

Implications for humans within a cooperative human–robot picking environment are discussed by Lee et al. (2017). An overview of different types of co-working (cell, coexistence, synchronized, cooperation, collaboration) can be found at Bender et al. (2016). RMFS can be implemented with approaches for navigation in a warehouse. Some research on navigation can be found in Nguyen et al. (2016) or Hernandez et al. (2017).

Magazino realizes a picking robot capable of travelling to shelves, picking specific articles (shoe boxes) and delivering them to a transfer station (Mester and Wahl 2019). Within this system robots and humans work in parallel within a joint area. Bormann et al. (2019) show a buckling arm robot mounted on a mobile platform detecting objects by a camera system. They state the need for an adequate amount of training samples to enable a reliable object detection.

The collection of these samples is automated by an object recording station collecting colored 3d point clouds. Furthermore, different systems for bin picking (Martinez et al. 2015) or shelf picking (Liang et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2016; Wahrmann et al. 2019) are proposed. Gripping of complex formed articles is discussed by Liu et al. (2019) and Kozai and Hashimoto (2018) calculate the risk for collision in case of different objects in a picking scene. Verbeet et al.

(2019) describe a cooperative human–robot picking system using an integrated feedback-loop to improve the ability of object detection of robots. The following section explains this concept in detail. 3 Cooperative Picking System Rieder and Verbeet (2019) present an adaptive process model to realize a cooperative picking system containing an Application-Phase and a Learning-Phase. This model was extended by Verbeet et al.

(2019) by an Adjustment-Phase and a CooperationPhase as well as by a conceptual picking system describing its components and their interactions. The model is shown in Fig. 1. Within the Learning-Phase models for object detection are created and improved using image data recorded in a controlled environment as well as data from operational processes.

This phase is decoupled from operational order picking within the Application-Phase where humans and robots work in parallel within a picking environment. A picking robot is supposed to successfully grip and withdraw from a storage location after a successful object detection. In case of an unsuccessful object detection it tries to find a solution on its 46 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet Fig. 1 Adaptive process model for picking-robots (Verbeet et al.

2019) own by predefined options during the Adjustment-Phase, e.g. by moving its camera to a different position. If this is not successful, the Cooperation-Phase is triggered calling a human picker (Emergency Call) to support the robot by picking the article and generating feedback for an improvement of object detection.

This feedback contains image data gathered from the operative situation at the shelf by the robot’s camera and information added by the human picker (article-ID, position of article defined by a bounding box) to enable training. The process model can be realized using an agent-based system architecture, whose components are shown in Fig. 2. A Warehouse-Managemen-System (WMS) is responsible for administration of inventory data and allocation of picking orders.

Human pickers and picking robots cooperatively process assigned orders, whereby human pickers are interacting with IT systems and picking robots by wearables (Kong et al. 2019). Furthermore, a Picture Recording Machine is used for efficient and controlled image recording (Rieder and Verbeet 2019). These images are stored on a data server and are used for training of models for object detection by a computation cluster.

Communication is realized by MQTT enabling topic controlled publishing and receiving of FIPA-conform Agent Communication Language (ACL) messages. Interaction patterns define the sequence of messages between components and embed it into the picking processes. Each article can be successfully detected by a picking robot with a probability of POD . An average probability is introduced to evaluate picking robots’ performance for successful object detection.

The working points PBreak (EffortRobot = BenefitRobot ), PHuman (ErrorRobot = ErrorHuman ), and PImprove (Epoch- = δLimit ) are defined. This probability describes the efficiency of object detection but not the overall performance of the system. Regarding the overall system performance, the capacity of human pickers and picking robots and the effort for Emergency Calls resulting from unsuccessful object detection must be considered.

The assignment of orders to human pickers and picking robots during the interaction pattern “Picking Order” is of major Collaborative Automated Picking 47 Fig. 2 Picking system to realize the adaptive process model according to Verbeet et al. (2019) importance within this capacitive evaluation because it enables workload balancing.

It is realized by a one-stage auction process arranged according to Contract Net Protocol (FIPA 2001) allocation orders depending on the effort for order fulfilment measured by time and using current workload, order lead time and duration of probably arising Emergency Calls. The adaptive process model must reserve capacity to allow the feedback-loop to improve object detection. Therefore, an equilibrium between order fulfilment and improvement must be found, i.e.

a working point must be defined at which fulfilment of all picking orders is guaranteed but robots are free to cause Emergency Calls to gather operational data. In the following chapter, a calculation for such an equilibrium is presented to setup picking capacity and control order assignment ensuring order fulfilment while maximizing robots’ workload to trigger Emergency Calls. 4 System Evaluation The general approach is a capacitive evaluation of the performance of a picking system.

It can be used for proactive capacity planning or operational control of order assignment. Moreover, an approach for an overall performance evaluation of picking robots’ ability for object detection is proposed according to the classification of 48 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet Verbeet et al. (2019) using a minimal probability of object detection Break to define an efficient working point for picking robots.

4.1 Capacity Planning of Picking System According to the adaptive process model picking orders can be fulfilled by humans and robots in parallel. The overall picking performance of a system is reduced by the robots’ dynamic learning process respectively by Emergency Calls. The following calculation enables the evaluation if a specific order assignment, i.e. an allocation of picking orders to human pickers and picking robots, allows the execution of all orders with the existing capacity.

Basis for this calculation is a demand forecast for a time interval, e.g.

one shift, containing articles and their number of picks, whereby this forecast is divided into two subsets for humans and robots each:  DF = PicksArticle, Forecast (1) Article, Forecast DF = SubsetRobot + SubsetHuman  = PicksArticle, Robot + Article, Robot  PicksArticle, Human (2) Article, Human During the processing of orders from SubsetRobot , unsuccessful object detection can trigger an Emergency Call leading to a time effort for human (LEC,H ) and robot (LEC,R ).

This effort is assumed to be constant for a picking system and can be evaluated from empirical data (Verbeet et al. 2019).

The expected total effort for human pickers and picking robot is the sum of the effort for a single Emergency Call multiplied with the probability for an unsuccessful object detection weighted by the number of picks from SubsetRobot : LEC,H,SR =     PicksArticle, Robot · LEC,H · 1 − POD, Article (3)    PicksArticle,Robot · LEC,R · 1 − POD, Article (4) Article, Robot LEC,R,SR =  Article, Robot A picking capacity for human pickers (CH ) and picking robots (CR ) is calculated by multiplying an individual picking rate (picks per time unit) depending on warehouse organisation and picking environment with the number of humans respectively robots: Collaborative Automated Picking 49 CH = PickingRateSingleHuman · NumberHuman (5) CR = PickingRateSingleRobot · NumberRobot (6) In addition, an effective working time (WT) without breaks, charging or technical down time within the time interval of the forecast is defined.

The two subsets must be defined in such a way that they can be fulfilled with the existing picking capacity: CH · WT − LEC,H,SR ≥ Subset Human WT (7) CR · WT − LEC,R,SR ≥ Subset Robot WT (8) To enable a picking system to fulfil all picking orders the effective picking capacity of all humans and robots reduced by the capacity to handle Emergency Calls must be greater than or equal to the demand forecast.

Therefore, the following equilibrium is defined: CH · WT − LEC,H,SR LEC,R,SR + CR · WT − ≥ DF WT WT (9) The linear optimization model from Fig. 3 is based on the Eqs. (1)–(9) and calculates the subsets. The goal is to maximize the workload of robots and humans subject Fig. 3 Calculation of subsets by linear programming in OPL 50 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet to capacity restrictions and total order fulfilment.

Therefore, robots are assigned as many picking orders as possible to learn from resulting Emergency Calls. The model is programmed in OPL using OPL-Studio 12.8.0.0 (IBM 2020). The picking system is modelled by the constant input parameters working time WT, theoretical picking capacity (C_R and C_H) and a set of articles each possessing a probability for successful object detection POD . Constraints are the capacity restrictions from Eqs. (7) to (8).

The subsets are defined by the additional variables PicksRobot and PicksHuman defining the number of picks of an article within its corresponding subset. After introducing these variables, order fulfilment can also be defined as constraint by matching the sum of PicksRobot and PicksHuman against an article’s picks within D_F. 4.2 Preselection for Order Assignment The equilibrium defined by Eq. (5) can also be used for a preselection during order assignment.

Two variants are introduced: the generation of a list of articles which − may be assigned to a robot and the calculation of a threshold POD for the expected probability for successful object detection during order picking. 4.2.1 Preselection by Article List If the articles of a picking order are part of SubsetRobot , robots are considered by the WMS during order assignment process.

There is no need for a robot-specific assignment: Offering many human-only orders will stepwise increase their workload (order queue). When orders accessible by robots are offered, this workload will increase their effort values increasing the probability robots will win the auction. The effect of this mechanism is shown in Fig. 4. It assumes the initial forecast DF in total is reliable within working time WT but does not consider the variation of DemandReal over time.

Therefore, it must be encountered by a feedback control during operation. At first, an initial calculation of subsets is using a linear smoothed total demand DF for WT as DemandCalculation,0 . By a rolling recalculation which is based on the remaining working time and the difference of executed orders and original forecast new subsets are defined. In each recalculation a new POD for an article can also be considered.

These recalculations are heavily affected by the rolling time span: the smaller the time span, the more effective is the matching of forecast and real demand. In contrary, the system is not allowed to trigger many Emergency Calls and learning is limited. Greater time spans allow higher delay during order fulfilment but enable a higher amount of Emergency Calls and thereby more input data for learning. In Fig. 4 recalculations for the time values t1 , t2 und t3 are shown.

Even if all existing orders are fulfilled at t1 , the number of executed orders C1 is beneath the Collaborative Automated Picking 51 Fig. 4 Concept for a rolling calculation of subsets for a preselection before order assignment calculated DemandCalculation,0 resulting in lower capacity for Emergency Calls and “pulling” OrderFulfilment upwards. The same effect can be observed at t2 , whereby actually a real backlog of picking orders exists.

At t3 , the number of executed orders is above the last recalculation DemandCalculation,2 and more capacity for Emergency Calls is considered during the calculation of subsets, although the backlog still exists. The question arises why a preselection is necessary during an order assignment by an auction which inherently should balance the workload. One reason is the variation of demand during WT.

If an order’s deadline for fulfilment is the end of WT, a statistical approach is sufficient because temporary backlog induced by Emergency Calls can be caught up over time. But if too much capacity is bound by Emergency Calls and due times for picking orders exist, there must be a regulating mechanism. Free capacity at the end of WT resulting from this mechanism can be used for learning orders described in Verbeet et al. (2019) to further improve object detection.

A problem according to this mechanism can arise from the calculation of subsets by the linear program. Its solution is not unique, and articles can occur rarely in a subset. This effect could be avoided by further constraints or some higher meta control of the optimizing. 52 4.2.2 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet Preselection by Threshold The forecast DF is defined as a set of picks, i.e. no connection between picks and − articles exists and the subsets are abstract volumes of picks.

A threshold PThreshold is calculated according to the expected probability of object detection for the articles − of SubsetRobot and is compared with POrder before the initial call for bids during order − assignment. However, the POD of a single article can be lower than PThreshold . In − general, P is defined as the arithmetic mean of object detection POD weighted with the set of picks for a set of articles as shown in Eq. (10). Thereby, Eqs.

(3) and (4) can be defined by using a constant value for object detection:  PicksArticle P = · POD, Article Article PicksArticle Article   − LEC,H,SR = SubsetRobot · LEC,H · 1 − PSubset, Robot −     − LEC,R,SR = SubsetRobot · LEC,R · 1 − PSubset, Robot (10) (11) (12) The linear program shown in Fig. 3 is modified by defining a subset as a set of picks. Using the Eqs. (11) and (12) the article-specific POD is replaced by a constant value. This value is minimized by the goal function.

The equilibrium from Eq. (5) is still a constraint forcing the calculated POD to be the smallest value allowing an allocation of subsets. However, the goal function loses its linearity by this modification and therefore the optimization model is solved by Constraint Programming (using CP) in OPL-Studio. This also makes a modification by “dexpr” and a scaling-factor of 100 necessary because this method only accepts integers. The resulting optimization model is shown in Fig. 5.

At recalculation the set of executed picks and the remaining working time are updated. If there are more executed orders than expected, more capacity for Emer− gency Calls is released, PThreshold is reduced, and robots are assigned more picking orders. In contrast, if execution is beneath the expected value, P: − Threshold must be increased to raise picking performance by reducing the chance of triggering Emergency Calls.

This approach is using a general POD enabling the handling of articles with a weak POD by picking robots. On the other hand, control of operational order fulfilment is weaker as picks are treated independent from articles. Collaborative Automated Picking 53 − Fig. 5 Calculation of PThreshold by linear programming in OPL 4.3 Definition of Working Point for System Efficiency Verbeet et al. (2019) introduce different thresholds to evaluate object detection of an article.

PBreak is of major importance for real applications defining an equilibrium of effort for Emergency Calls and successful picks by robots. But to evaluate the efficiency of robots the overall system performance must be considered. A system can work in an efficient way even if the probabilities of object detection for single articles are less than PBreak .

Consequently, an average probability of object detection for all articles is defined as well as an equilibrium between effort and benefit of using robots. The Eqs. (13) and (14) calculate an expected effort for humans (LEC,H,F ) and robots (LEC,R,F ) for the forecast DF . In Eq. (15) an equilibrium is defined equalizing the picking capacity of robots reduced by their effort due to Emergency Calls, i.e.

their effective picking capacity and the effort of human pickers for handling Emergency Calls:   − (13) LEC,H,F = DF · LEC,H · 1− P   − LEC,R,F = DF · LEC,R · 1− P LEC,H,F LEC,R,F = CR · WT − WT WT (14) (15) 54 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet Therefore, by P; − the capacity human pickers must reserve for error handling is defined. However, this does not give any information about the ability of the picking system to fulfil all picking orders. This is guaranteed by meeting Eq. (9).

In this case − − P matches PBreak and can be calculated by transforming Eq. (15): − PBreak = 1 − − CR · WT2 DF · (LEC,R + LEC,H ) (16) − Comparing PBreak and PReal the efficiency of picking robots can be evaluated, − whereby PReal is calculated from real probabilities for object detection POD : − − PBreak > PReal : Human pickers must expend more capacity for handling Emergency Calls than robots can compensate by executing successful picks, i.e.

the effective picking capacity of the system would be higher without robots. − − PBreak = PReal : The effort of human pickers for handling Emergency Calls and contribution of successful picks executed by robots equals each other. At this point, the system benefits from the collection of data to improve the ability of object − detection of the picking robots resulting in an increasing PReal .

− − PBreak < PReal : Picking robots are working efficient, meaning the effort of humans and robots for handling Emergency Calls is smaller than robots’ contribution by executed picks. Consequently, the effective picking capacity is increased by the deployment of robots. 5 Discussion The presented calculation approaches specify the mechanism for order assignment of the interaction pattern “Picking Order” and enable a capacitive evaluation of the picking system.

However, the static input variables are problematic, i.e. the time requirements for calculating the effort value during order assignment and the empirical loss values for an Emergency Call LEC,H and LEC,R . These assumptions make sense for a sufficiently large picking system that is evaluated over a longer period, so the real expectancy values match with the values of the assumptions.

In systems with strongly fluctuating travel times, assuming constant effort can lead to an unacceptable weighting of POD . Therefore, the mentioned input variables should be calculated dynamically. For the calculation of the duration of an emergency call, standardized time assessments of processes such as MTM (Britzke 2010) can be used to calculate them context-dependent. Empirical data can be generated from an operative system using the approach described by Feldhorst (2018).

Within robots, time values can be derived from calculations of their internal controller. Collaborative Automated Picking 55 The preselection based on the capacitive equilibrium from Eq. (5) requires a static forecast for a time interval. This assumption is acceptable in systems with plannable or predictable demands. Without such a known lead a system can only be controlled reactively making the concept not reliable, because fluctuating demand must be covered by additional time buffer or resources.

Alternatively, a forecast could be generated for each recalculation based on current order data and empirical values from previous periods. The threshold calculation is a statistical approach allowing a system to fluctuate to a certain degree and only slightly limits the auctioning process of order assignment. However, an empirical study must show whether the calculated threshold values are reliable. The approach tends to be more resilient the more complex the system is, i.e.

the more articles exist, and the more robots and humans can process orders. The calculation of PBreak is an approach to evaluate the general efficiency of picking robots. In Verbeet et al. (2019), the additional working points PHuman and PImprove are also defined, whereby PImprove describes a very artificial value which can only be achieved in exceptional cases in operational systems.

Most articles are expected to reach values between PBreak and PHuman to meet the capacity restrictions and ensure order processing. The evaluations are based on a capacitive view of humans and robots and initially do not make any statements about economic aspects of the picking system. For such a consideration, an additional cost model would have to be integrated into the calculation.

This cannot be formulated generally for the heterogeneous requirements and technical specifications of picking systems, which is why a capacitive approach was chosen in this paper. 6 Conclusions The challenge of finding personnel for picking and handle continuously changing article ranges can be countered with partially automated picking systems creating a cooperative working environment for humans and picking robots.

The motivation is to ensure reliable order fulfilment by implementation of a feedback-loop (Emergency Call) between humans and robots for error handling and data collection for machine learning algorithms in order to continuously improve object detection and thereby improve overall performance of picking robots. In this paper, a concept for measurement and evaluation of system performance to ensure the processing of picking orders and the training of picking robots is introduced.

The proposed approach is using a capacitive evaluation of a picking system to define equilibrium between the requirements of order processing, the picking performance of humans and robots and the effort for improving object detection of the robots. In a picking system this equilibrium can be used for strategic evaluation of the automated picking performance of robots (working point), for tactical resource planning (capacity planning) or for operational workload balancing (order assignment).

Even if this evaluation mechanisms extend the adaptive process model and the conceptual picking system, there are still open questions for future research. 56 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet The presented calculation uses static assumptions for actually dynamic parameters making its equations only reliable for complex systems considering a sufficiently long runtime. However, the evaluation concept can be expanded by context-based calculations using MTM-based approaches.

The actions of robots can be evaluated based on functions of their internal control, e.g. travel time between picking locations as outcome from path planning. The components for a demonstrator, which is to validate the presented evaluation approach with empirical data, have been developed at Ulm University of Applied Sciences in recent months. The configuration of these components and the definition of suitable scenarios are still pending and will be completed soon.

The evaluation approach will also be integrated into an intra-logistic scenario with real robots. These provide context-dependent estimations for the required time of their actions in order to enable a dynamic and context-based calculation of time effort and fulfilment time during order processing. The model for object detection is also subject of current research. In current work, a singular neural network is used for the detection of all existing articles in a picking system.

An alternative approach pursues the dynamic combination of several neural networks for one article each, which are compared for object detection with one another by an algorithm based on their storage locations provided by an overall WMS. This is intended to modularize object detection and shorten training times. The comparison “singular” versus “combined” can also be carried out by the demonstrator.

Acknowledgments This work is part of the project “ZAFH Intralogistik”, funded by the European Regional Development Fund and the Ministry of Science, Research and Arts of Baden-Württemberg, Germany (F.No. 32-7545.24-17/3/1). It is also done within the post graduate school “Cognitive Computing in Socio-Technical Systems“ of Ulm University of Applied Sciences and Ulm University, which is funded by Ministry for Science, Research and Arts of the State of Baden-Württemberg, Germany.

References Azadeh K, de Koster RBM, Roy D (2017). Robotized and automated warehouse systems: review and recent developments. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2977779 Bender M, Braun M, Rally P, Scholtz O, Bauer W (2016) Leichtbauroboter in der manuellen Montage-Einfach anfangen: Erste Erfahrungen von Anwenderunternehmen. Fraunhofer IAO, Stuttgart Bonini M, Urru A, Echelmeyer W (2019) The quality interaction function deployment for lean human-robot interaction.

In: 24th international conference on methods and models in automation and robotics (MMAR). IEEE, pp 145–151. https://doi.org/10.1109/MMAR.2019.8864667 Bormann R, Brito BF, de Lindermayr J, Omainska M, Patel M (2019) Towards automated order picking robots for warehouses and retail.

In: Tzovaras D, Giakoumis D, Vincze M (eds) Theoretical computer science and general issues, computer vision systems: 12th international conference, ICVS 2019, Thessaloniki, Greece, 23–25 September 2019, Proceedings, 1st edn. Springer International Publishing, pp 185–198 Collaborative Automated Picking 57 Britzke B (2010) MTM in einer globalisierten Wirtschaft: Arbeitsprozesse systematisch gestalten und optimieren (1. Aufl.). mi-Wirtschaftsbuch.

FinanzBuch-Verl Brynzér H, Johansson MI, Medbo L (1994) A methodology for evaluation of order picking systems as a base for system design and managerial decisions. Int J Oper Produc Manag 14(3):126–139. https://doi.org/10.1108/01443579410058595 Bukchin Y, Khmelnitsky E, Yakuel P (2012) Optimizing a dynamic order-picking process. Eur J Oper Res 219(2):335–346.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2011.12.041 Chabot (2018) Material handling optimization in warehousing operations, Thesis, Université Laval, Quebec, Canada. https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Material-handling-optimizat ion-in-warehousing-Chabot/ea2e64e1cdd15aee660e252883ca0fc022bc913c, https://corpus.ula val.ca/jspui/bitstream/20.500.11794/36277/1/34371.pdf Chen B, Qu T, Thurer M, Huang GQ, Li C, Xu S (2017) Warehouse workload control for production logistic.

In 13th IEEE international conference on automation science and engineering (CASE). IEEE, pp 237–242. https://doi.org/10.1109/COASE.2017.8256109 Dallari F, Marchet G, Melacini M (2009) Design of order picking system. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 42(1–2):1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-008-1571-9 de Koster R, Le-Duc T, Roodbergen KJ (2007) Design and control of warehouse order picking: a literature review. Eur J Oper Res 182(2):481–501.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2006.07.009 Feldhorst S (2018) Automatische Aktivitäts- und Kontexterkennung zur Analyse des Kommissionierprozesses. Dissertation, Praxiswissen Service UG; Technische Universität Dortmund]. GBV Gemeinsamer Bibliotheksverbund FIPA (2001) Contract net interaction protocol specification. https://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00029/ Gong Y, de Koster RBM, van Nunen JAEE (2010) A flexible evaluative framework for order picking systems. Produc Oper Manag 19(1):70–82.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1937-5956.2009.01047.x Grosse EH, Glock CH, Neumann WP (2017) Human factors in order picking: a content analysis of the literature. Int J Prod Res 55(5):1260–1276. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2016.1186296 Gu J, Goetschalckx M, McGinnis LF (2010) Research on warehouse design and performance evaluation: a comprehensive review. Eur J Oper Res 203(3):539–549. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

ejor.2009.07.031 Hanson R, Medbo L, Johansson MI (2018) Performance characteristics of robotic mobile fulfilment systems in order picking applications. IFAC-PapersOnLine 51(11):1493–1498. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.ifacol.2018.08.290 Heine F, Wenzel S (2013). Comparison of performance measurement-systems used for orderpicking. https://doi.org/10.2195/lj_Rev_heine_en_201312_01 Henn S (2015) Order batching and sequencing for the minimization of the total tardiness in picker-topart warehouses.

Flex Serv Manuf J 27(1):86–114. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10696-012-9164-1 Hernandez K, Bacca B, Posso B (2017) Multi-goal path planning autonomous system for picking up and delivery tasks in mobile robotics. IEEE Latin Am Trans 15(2):232–238. https://doi.org/ 10.1109/tla.2017.7854617 Hoffman G (2019) Evaluating fluency in human-robot collaboration. IEEE Trans Hum-Mach Syst 49(3):209–218.

https://doi.org/10.1109/thms.2019.2904558 Hsieh L-F, Huang Y-C (2011) New batch construction heuristics to optimise the performance of order picking systems. Int J Prod Econ 131(2):618–630. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2011.02.006 Hwang HS, Cho GS (2006) A performance evaluation model for order picking warehouse design. Comput Ind Eng 51(2):335–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2005.10.002 IBM (2020) IBM ILOG CPLEX optimization studio.

https://www.ibm.com/de-de/products/ilogcplex-optimization-studio Jaghbeer (2019) On the performance of robotic parts-to-picker order picking systems, Thesis, ISSN1654-9732, Division of Supply and Operations Management, Department of Technology Management and Economics, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.

https:// research.chalmers.se/publication/513777/file/513777_Fulltext.pdf Jane C-C, Laih Y-W (2005) A clustering algorithm for item assignment in a synchronized zone order picking system. Eur J Oper Res 166(2):489–496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2004.01.042 58 M. Rieder and R. Verbeet Kłodawski M, Jachimowski R (2013) Ant algorithms for designing order picking systems. Prace Naukowe Politechniki Warszawskiej. Transport (z. 97): 259–269.

https://www.infona.pl/res ource/bwmeta1.element.baztech-4e4dac6b-1209-4d34-85a4-c4d66fbf8cf4 Kong XTR, Luo H, Huang GQ, Yang X (2019) Industrial wearable system: the human-centric empowering technology in Industry 4.0. J Intell Manuf 30(8): 2853–2869. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10845-018-1416-9 Kozai K, Hashimoto M (2018) Determining robot grasping-parameters by estimating “Picking Risk”. In: International workshop on advanced image technology (IWAIT). IEEE. https://doi.

org/10.1109/iwait.2018.8369707 Krug R, Stoyanov T, Tincani V, Andreasson H, Mosberger R, Fantoni G, Lilienthal AJ (2016) The next step in robot commissioning: autonomous picking and palletizing. IEEE Robot Autom Lett 1(1):546–553. https://doi.org/10.1109/lra.2016.2519944 Lamballais T, Roy D, de Koster RBM (2017) Estimating performance in a robotic mobile fulfillment system. Eur J Oper Res 256(3):976–990.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.06.063 Lee JA, Chang YS, Choe YH (2017) Assessment and comparison of human-robot co-work order picking systems focused on ergonomic factors. In: International conference on applied human factors and ergonomics. Springer, Cham, pp 516–523. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-605258_53 Liang C, Chee KJ, Zou Y, Zhu H, Causo A, Vidas S, Teng T, Chen IM, Low KH, Cheah CC (2015) Automated robot picking system for e-commerce fulfillment warehouse application.

In: 14th IFToMM world congress Lin C-C, Kang J-R, Hou C-C, Cheng C-Y (2016) Joint order batching and picker Manhattan routing problem. Comput Ind Eng 95:164–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2016.03.009 Liu Y-R, Huang M-B, Huang H-P (2019) Automated grasp planning and path planning for a robot hand-arm system. In IEEE/SICE international symposium on system integration (SII). IEEE.

https://doi.org/10.1109/sii.2019.8700433 Manzini R, Gamberi M, Persona A, Regattieri A (2007) Design of a class based storage picker to product order picking system. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 32(7–8):811–821. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s00170-005-0377-2 Martinez C, Boca R, Zhang B, Chen H, Nidamarthi S (2015) Automated bin picking system for randomly located industrial parts.

In IEEE international conference on technologies for practical robot applications (TePRA): Crowne Plaza Boston-Woburn 15 Middlesex Canal Park Woburn, Massachusetts, 01801 USA, 11–12 May 2013. IEEE, pp 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/TePRA. 2015.7219656 Merschformann M, Lamballais T, de Koster R, Suhl L (2018) Decision rules for robotic mobile fulfillment systems. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1801.06703 Mester J, Wahl F (2019) Robotik in der Intralogistik-Ein Projekt der Unternehmen Fiege und Magazino.

In Logistik der Zukunft—Logistics for the future. Springer, Gabler, Wiesbaden, pp 199–211. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-23805-6_7 Molnár B (2004) Planning of order picking processes using simulation and a genetic algorithm in multi-criteria scheduling optimisation. In: Proceedings 16th European simulation symposium. SCS Press. Nguyen TH, Kim DH, Lee CH, Kim HK, Kim SB (2016) Mobile robot localization and path planning in a picking robot system using kinect camera in partially known environment.

In: International conference on advanced engineering theory and applications. Springer, Cham, pp 686–701. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50904-4_70 Pan JC-H, Wu M-H (2012) Throughput analysis for order picking system with multiple pickers and aisle congestion considerations. Comput Oper Res 39(7):1661–1672. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cor.2011.09.022 Pinto ARF, Nagano MS (2020) Genetic algorithms applied to integration and optimization of billing and picking processes. J Intell Manuf 31(3):641–659.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10845-019-014 70-3 Collaborative Automated Picking 59 Rieder M, Verbeet R (2019) Robot-human-learning for robotic picking processes. In: Kersten W, Blecker T, Ringle CM (eds) Proceedings of the hamburg international conference of logistics (HICL): Vol. 27. Proceedings of the Hamburg international conference of logistics (HICL)/Artificial intelligence and digital transformation in supply chain management: innovative approaches for supply chains, 10th edn., pp 87–114.

https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/ 209370, https://doi.org/10.15480/882.2466 Scholz A, Schubert D, Wäscher G (2017) Order picking with multiple pickers and due dates— simultaneous solution of order batching, batch assignment and sequencing, and picker routing problems. Eur J Oper Res 263(2):461–478.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.04.038 Seyedrezaei M, Najafi SE, Aghajani A, Bagherzadeh Valami H (2012) Designing a genetic algorithm to optimize fulfilled orders in order picking planning problem with probabilistic demand. Int J Res Indus Eng 1(2):40–57 Tu M, Shih PH, Yang MF, Lin CK, Kao SL (2019). Using multi-objective genetic algorithm on order picking system. In: Ao S-I (ed) Lecture notes in engineering and computer science.

International multiconference of engineers and computer scientists 2019. International Association of Engineers, pp 35–39. Valle CA, Beasley JE (2019) Order allocation, rack allocation and rack sequencing for pickers in a mobile rack environment. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1903.06702v3 van Gils T (2019) Designing efficient order picking systems: combining planning problems and integrating real-life features. 4OR 17(3):331–332.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10288-019-00405-1 van Gils T, Ramaekers K, Caris A, Cools M (2017) The use of time series forecasting in zone order picking systems to predict order pickers’ workload. Int J Prod Res 55(21):6380–6393. https:// doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2016.1216659 Vanheusden S, van Gils T, Ramaekers K, Caris A (2017) Reducing workload imbalance in parallel zone order picking systems.

https://www.Semanticscholar.Org/paper/Reducing-Workload-Imb alance-in-Parallel-Zone-Order-Vanheusden-Gils/e4ab7b0c6ae339849731d5b60049c0d0e789 4b81 VDI (2007) Operational logistics key figures from goods receiving to dispatch (Richtlinie, 4490). Beuth Verlag GmbH, Berlin Verbeet R, Rieder M, Kies M (2019) Realization of a cooperative human-robot-picking by a learning multi-robot-system using BDI-agents. SSRN Electr J. Advance online publication. https://doi.

org/10.2139/ssrn.3502934 Wahrmann D, Hildebrandt A-C, Schuetz C, Wittmann R, Rixen D (2019) An autonomous and flexible robotic framework for logistics applications. J Intell Rob Syst 93(3):419–431. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10846-017-0746-8 Yu M, de Koster RBM (2009) The impact of order batching and picking area zoning on order picking system performance. Eur J Oper Res 198(2):480–490.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2008.09.011 Zhang H, Long P, Zhou D, Qian Z, Wang Z, Wan W, Manocha D, Park C, Hu T, Cao C, Chen Y, Chow M, Pan J (2016) Dorapicker: an autonomous picking system for general objects. In: IEEE international conference on automation science and engineering (CASE). IEEE, pp 721–726. https://doi.org/10.1109/COASE.2016.7743473 Zhang J, Wang X, Chan FTS, Ruan J (2017) On-line order batching and sequencing problem with multiple pickers: A hybrid rule-based algorithm.

Appl Math Model 45:271–284. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.apm.2016.12.012 Zhu H, Kok YY, Causo A, Chee KJ, Zou Y, Al-Jufry SOK, Liang C, Chen I-M, Cheah CC, Low KH (2016) Strategy-based robotic item picking from shelves. In: IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/iros.2016.7759354 Zou Y, Zhang D, Qi M (2019) Order picking system optimization based on picker-robot collaboration.

In: Proceedings of the 2019 5th international conference on industrial and business engineering—ICIBE 2019. ACM Press, pp 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3364335.3364386 Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identification in Logistics and Production Seng Fat Wong and Weng Ian Ho Abstract With the booming e-commerce development, advanced industrial logistics technique is necessary to enhance its working accuracy and efficiency.

Meanwhile, the demand of Auto Guidance Vehicles (AGVs) is increasing while the technique can be popularized to apply in logistics and production. However, the AGV is necessary to work with precise technology for enhancing its performance. Therefore, the demands on the automatic identification and localization with RFID technology for supporting logistics and production are raising and it becomes the most important.

In this chapter, the RFID technology integrating into the indoor positioning technology with LANDMARC methodology is studied. Moreover, the virtual reference elimination (VIRE) algorithm that is based on LANDMARC algorithm is applied to advance the performance of RFID localization. The VIRE positioning method is added with virtual reference tags to improve the accuracy of positioning in this study. This chapter summarizes three main contributions in this methodology.

First, the RFID localization is more cost-efficiency in logistics and production, because it is no need to consider additional readers and tags. The hardware cost is the same as in the case of both LANDMARC and VIRE systems, so the accuracy can be easily improved in the comparison with LANDMARC. Second, the estimated position of target tags are more accurate because it works with virtual tags for localization.

Third, the VIRE system can better adapt to dynamic indoor scenarios than the LANDMARC system in real environments.

Keywords RFID localization · LANDMARC · Virtual reference elimination (VIRE) · Auto guidance vehicles (AGVs) S. F. Wong (B) · W. I. Ho Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau, Avenida da Universidade, Taipa, Macau 11-4081, China e-mail: fstsfw@um.edu.mo W. I. Ho e-mail: edcoho@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_4 61 62 S. F. Wong and W. I. Ho 1 Introduction Online shopping is rapid development in the life and industries. Therefore, the logistic development is rapidly increasing into new generation. It is necessary to concern for enhancing its efficiency.

Most of the logistic industries has been changed to use Auto Guidance Vehicles (AGVs) to instead of traditional human operation. However, the performance of AGV is being studied to more precise. Some researchers are considering to apply the Vision based Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (vSLAM) technique to optimize the transportation path for AGV (Wong and Yu 2019a). Meanwhile, the professional software is also supported to enhance the performance of logistics management (Wong and Yu 2019b).

However, some logistic companies are not considered to use AGV with vSLAM technique because of cost-efficiency. Radio frequency identification (RFID) has been widely used in supporting the logistics management special in applying big data approach for logistics trajectory discovery (Zhong et al. 2015). Moreover, it is also applied in the RFID logistics system applicable to ubiquitous-city (Hong and So 2009).

The general cargo handler logistics had studied to enhance the performance by the RFID technique with human error consequences (Giustia et al. 2019). Therefore, logistics and production are increasing the demand of AGVs with RFID technology. The LANDMARC methodology is recently referenced for the positioning algorithms with RFID technology (Ho and Wong 2012), the coordinates of readers and reference tags are known and the target tags can be calculated by different weights of them.

The virtual reference elimination (VIRE) algorithm that is based on LANDMARC algorithm is applied to advance the performance of RFID localization, virtual tags are used to replace the reference tags in LANDMARC which can reduce the noise between tags and enhance the accuracy as more points can be used to calculate.

LANDMARC algorithm, utilizes Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) to track moving objects, was the first attempt using active RFID for indoor location sensing with satisfactory result. In order to increase accuracy, it utilize the reference tags as reference points to assist readers in locating the unknown tracking tags, is one of the most classic algorithm using RFID for indoor location.

LANDMARE contributed an idea of estimate the coordinates of tracking tags by comparing their RSSI values with those of k-nearest reference tag at known coordinates. Apparently, more reference tags means tracking tag located with greater precision. At the same time, excessive amount of reference will not only increase cost, but also introduce expected radio frequency interference, which led to inaccuracy of positioning.

For overcoming this defect of LANDMARC, VIRE introduce a concept of “virtual reference tags” to obtain more likely accurate positions without additional cost. The real reference tags in LANDMARC are properly placed to form a 2D regular grid. This real regular grid is further divided into n × n equal sized virtual grid cells, and each virtual grid cells are treated as covered by four virtual reference tags.

The RSSI of virtual reference tags is calculated from those real reference tags by linear interpolation algorithm. The whole sensing area is divided into a number of location regions, which the centre of each region correspond to a virtual reference tag. Every Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identification … 63 reader has its own proximity map.

If the difference between the RSS measurement of the unknown tag and the RSS measurement of a region is smaller than a threshold, the region is marked as 1. The fusion of all the n readers’ maps provides a global proximity map for the tag. In this paper, the VIRE positioning method is studied and further validated for supporting the advanced performance with RFID technology in logistics management.

The RFID localization is cost-efficiency in logistics and production as no additional readers and tags is required. Meanwhile, the estimated position of target tags is more accurate because it works with virtual tags. The VIRE system can better adapt to dynamic indoor scenarios than the LANDMARC system in real environments. It is focused to discuss and compare the VIRE system with the LANDMARC system in the static and dynamic situation in this paper.

2 Methodology The experiment of RFID localization system is applied UHF RFID technology. In this technology, the tags could be identified by the reader which shows by the identification code. The reader could also show the RSSI (Signal Strength Indication). It is decreased by the free path space loss. With the theory of the LANDMARC formula. The location of the tags could be found. The LANDMARC formula is using statistics to work out the probable location.

It contrasts the reference resources and the test tags for providing the most probable location of the test tags. In this paper, it is combined with LANDMARC formula and image processing to match the test tags in the real scene with the identification code. In order to calculate the location more accuracy, it is put forward the VIRE system that matches the test tags in real scene.

The RFID Reader is RF-CODE 443 MHz M250 Reader that receives and reports the radio frequency messages emitted by RF Code tags. Its read range is around 45 m. The M100 asset tags have 2 s motion alert and 10 s beacon time. The dynamic part in the experiment is very important, so the M100 asset tags are chosen. The experiment needs a high-speed stimulant which near to 60 km/h. Therefore, the simulation car is applied and instead of AGV. The stimulation car is the simplest one with a detection tag.

The traction engine is an electric engine which work in 24 V. Its rated speed could be 20,000 Rev. It’s a powerful traction engine. The high speed of the engine makes the traction line in a horrible speed. The traction line is designed away from the engine, otherwise, the engine is easy to wound by the traction line. Thus, the roller and bearing system are designed to solve this problem. The holder is used to simulate the real situation of the reader.

In the real situation, the reader on the warehouse will put upon the AGV. The Logitech C270 HD IPTV webcam is used to photographed and judge the location of the simulation car. In the software development is applied to Node.js, because it is an open-source, cross-platform runtime environment for developing server-side Web applications. The real reference tags are properly placed to form a 2D regular grid. Objective tags can be placed anywhere within gird.

In order to improve the precision of tracking 64 S. F. Wong and W. I. Ho tags within gird’s position. Thus, the gird should be divided into a finer gird based on the concept of virtual reference tags. The core of VIRE approach is that four real reference tags as per physical grid and then divided into n x n equal sized virtual gird cells. The coordinate of virtual reference tags to be defined on the basis of the coordinate of the four real reference tags are known.

On the RSSI values of virtual reference tag, the approach suggests the linear interpolation algorithm to obtain the RSSI values. To obtain the RSSI value of each virtual reference tag to each reader, therefore, the reference tags’ RSSI value and coordinate position are known in advance.

Thus, the RSSI values of virtual tags are interpolated by the formula below:   Sk (Ta+n1,b+n2 ) − Sk (Ta,b ) Sk TP,b = Sk (Ta,b ) + p + n+1 p × Sk (Ta+n1,b+n2 ) + (n + 1 − p) × Sk (Ta,b ) = n+1 (1) where Sk (Ti, j ) represents the RSSI value of the virtual reference tag located at the coordinate (i, j) for the kth reader. Assuming there are N × N virtual reference tags, the complexity of the interpolation algorithm is O (N2 ).

Therefore, the coordinate position of all real reference tags and virtual reference tags are known. On the other hand, the signal strength of all real reference tags and virtual reference tags also are known. Meanwhile, it is important to choice the ideal threshold value kth in the LANDMARC algorithm to obtain the localization of objective tags by the ideology of LANDMARC algorithm:   n  (θi − Si)2 Ej =  (2) i=1 where j ∈ (1, m).

The nearer reference tag to the tracking tag has a smaller E value. When there are m reference tags, an tracking tag has the vector E = (E1 , E2 , …… Em ). These E values are used to reflect the relations of the tags, the smallest E j means that the reference tag is the nearest reference tag surrounding the tracking tag. Kreference tags which have relative lower E values are selected from the m reference tags as the k neighbors.

The tracking tag’s coordinates are estimated by computing the weighted average of the k neighbors’ coordinates (Fig. 1): (x, y) = k  wi(xi, yi) (3) i=1 wi = k 1  1 / E2i i=1 E2i (4) Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identification … 65 Fig.

1 The RFID localization system setup 3 Results and Discussion The experiment of this research is included four parts which are the factor affecting the RSSI value, the database of reference tags, objective tags being matched at rest and objective tags being matched at dynamic. The experiments are done the same environment and condition.

However, it is focused to discuss and compare the VIRE system with the LANDMARC system in the static and dynamic situation in this paper, because it can show the main contributions for logistics management. As a result, the objectives tags are matched by the VIRE system which can more accurate than the LANDMARC system and Log-path loss models. It had been determined the RSSI data from the ten random object tags.

In this discussion, it is put forward the VIRE system which matched ten object tags in the static situation and compared with LANDMARC system in the static situation. The virtual reference tags are obtained though the formula (Eq. 1) that includes interpolated concepts. On the other hand, to confirm the data based on VIRE system is regarding to the LANDMARC system. Nevertheless, the VIRE system is different for the LANDMARC system because the VIRE approach adopts much more virtual reference tags.

In this two type of database, the main location method both are the weighting algorithm. The database of LANDMARC system has real 192 data. On the contrary, the database of VIRE System has 620 data which be divided into 192 real data and 428 virtual data.

66 S. F. Wong and W. I. Ho There are error rate: σ = VIRE coordinate − Real location coordinate Real location coordinate (5) As the results of Tables 1, 2, and 3, it can obtain that the error rate of VIRE system is lower than the error rate of LANDMARC system. In the X-axis, the average error of VIRE is 25.81% and the LANDMARC is 33.36% regarding Table 4. In the Y-axis, the average error of VIRE is 15.27% and the LANDMARC is 21.88% according to Table 4.

Some results using VIRE positioning system has some error up to only 1% for X-axis. However, some particular data, the error rate has suddenly increased up to 106.21% for instance (0.45, 24 m) that may be affected by irregular factors, such as scattering or surrounding material. Meanwhile, the error rate of VIRE system has the error up to only 1.54% for Y-axis.

Nevertheless, some particular data, the error Table 1 The real location and VIRE location of ten random tags Tag CODE Real coordinate RSSI VIRE location (coordinate) Error rate X (%) LOCATE00365552 (2, 3) (−62, −59) (2.023, 3.073) 1.15 2.43 LOCATE00365554 (2, 4) (−63, −62) (1.937, 4.426) 3.15 10.65 LOCATE00365555 (2.5, 5) (−65, −65) (2.075, 5.143) 17.00 2.86 LOCATE00365569 (1.5, 5) (−65, −68) (2.001, 8.132) 27.96 62.64 LOCATE00365556 (2, 8) (−66, −68) (1.980, 8.512) 1.00 6.21 LOCATE00365562 (1.5, 12) (−79, −75) (2.776, 14.369) 85.03 5.74 LOCATE00365561 (2, 18) (−73, −74) (2.027, 13.514) 1.35 24.90 LOCATE00365559 (3, 24) (−89, −88) (2.585, 26.909) 13.80 4.62 LOCATE00365560 (1, 25) (−89, 86) (2.224, 25.387) 106.21 1.54 LOCATE00365557 (2, 28) (−77, −81) (1.935, 16.816) 31.07 1.42 Error rate Y (%) Table 2 The real location and LANDMARC location of ten random tags Tag CODE Real coordinate RSSI LANDMARC location (coordinate) Error rate X (%) LOCATE00365552 (2, 3) (−62, −59) (2.150, 2.830) 7.50 5.67 LOCATE00365554 (2, 4) (−63, −62) (2.170, 5.480) 8.50 37.00 LOCATE00365555 (2.5, 5) (−65, −65) (1.960, 6.120) 21.60 22.40 LOCATE00365569 (1.5, 5) (−65, −68) (1.890, 8.140) 26.00 62.80 LOCATE00365556 (2, 8) (−66, −68) (2.070, 7.360) 3.50 8.00 LOCATE00365562 (1.5, 12) (−79, −75) (2.960 11.610) 97.33 3.25 LOCATE00365561 (2, 18) (−73, −74) (2.620, 12.320) 31.00 31.55 LOCATE00365559 (3, 24) (−89, −88) (2.410, 25.590) 19.67 6.62 LOCATE00365560 (1,25) (−89, 86) (2.170, 23.780) 117.00 4.88 LOCATE00365557 (2, 28) (−77, −81) (2.030, 17.730) 36.67 1.50 Error rate Y (%) Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identification … 67 Table 3 Error rate comparison between LANDMARC and VIRE Real coordinate Error rate X VIRE (%) Error rate Y VIRE (%) Error rate X LANDMARC (%) Error rate Y LANDMARC (%) (2, 3) 1.15 2.43 7.50 5.67 (2, 4) 3.15 10.65 8.50 37.00 (2.5, 5) 17.00 2.86 21.60 22.40 (1,5, 5) 27.96 62.64 26.00 62.80 (2, 8) 1.00 6.21 3.50 8.00 (1.5, 12) 85.03 5.74 97.33 3.25 (2, 18) 1.35 24.90 31.00 31.55 (3, 24) 13.80 4.62 19.67 6.62 (1, 25) 106.21 1.54 117.00 4.88 (2, 28) 1.42 31.07 1.50 36.67 Table 4 The average error rate of VIRE and LANDMARC X-axis (%) Y-axis (%) VIRE 25.81 15.27 LANDMARC 33.36 21.88 rate of VIRE system has suddenly increased up to 62.64% for instance (0.95, 4 m) that may be affected by irregular factors too.

Thus, the indoor environmental factor will be influenced with experimental error that will be studied in the further research as noise cancellation. It is shown that the VIRE system is more suitable for the real environment measurement comparing with LANDMARC system. It had been obtained the empirical log-distance path loss formula in the VIRE database.

In this discussion, it is analysed the method of VIRE System which compared with the empirical Log-distance path loss methods that are y express RSSI value and x express distance (Table 5). From the Tables 6 and 7, the VIRE error rate is lower than the error rate of empirical Log-path loss models. The VIRE system can be matched the location of objective tags by the RSSI value, but the empirical Log-distance path loss only obtained the distance of Y-axis.

Compared with the empirical Log-distance path loss models, the VIRE system is more suitable for locating in the real environment measurement. In the experiment of dynamic identification in real scene, the RFID VIRE system is connected with the real scene to match the RFID signal with the image signal. The camera catches the image signal with the probable location. With the probable location and the RFID signal, the VIRE location matches with the probable location.

The image signal can be matched with the RFID signal. For simulating the real scene in the high speed logistic operation, the testing simulation car should be assigned to different velocities which may be even to 60 km/h.

Assume the range of the RFID is 20 m, in consideration of the fastest detection interval of the RFID reader is 3 s. The 68 S. F. Wong and W. I. Ho Table 5 The experiment data with Log-distance path loss method of VIRE database Location Channel A Channel B 0.45 m X-axis y = −7.225ln(x) − 55.064 x = y+52.805 y = −7.312ln(x) − 52.805 x = e −7.312 y+55.064 e −7.225 0.95 m X-axis y = −7.297ln(x) − 53.484 x = y+52.732 y = −7.041ln(x) − 52.732 x = e −7.041 y+53.484 e −7.297 1.45 m X-axis y = −7.565ln(x) − 50.305 x = y+52.268 y = −6.675ln(x) − 52.268 x = e −6.675 y+50.305 e −7.565 1.95 m X-axis y = −8.088ln(x) − 50.624 x = e 2.45 m X-axis y = −8.669ln(x) − 52.278 x = e y+53.237 y = −6.814ln(x) − 53.237 x = e −6.814 y+50.624 −8.088 y+56.247 y = −6.892ln(x) − 56.247 x = e −6.892 y+52.278 −8.669 Table 6 Calculated path loss at different locations Real location (m) RSSI The distance of log path loss, Channel A The distance of log path loss, Channel B (1.45, 2) (−62, −59) x = e −7.565 y+50.305 4.69 m x = e −6.675 2.74 m (1.45, 3) (−63, −62) x = e y+50.305 −7.565 5.35 m x = e y+52.268 −6.675 4.30 m (−65, −65) x = e y+50.624 −8.088 5.91 m x = e y+53.237 −6.814 5.62 m (−65, −68) x = e y+53.484 −7.297 4.85 m x = e y+52.732 −7.041 8.74 m (−66, −68) x = e y+50.305 −7.565 7.96 m x = e y+52.268 −6.675 10.56 m (−79, −75) x = e y+53.484 −7.297 33.01 m x = e y+52.732 −7.041 23.63 m (−73, −74) x = e y+50.305 −7.565 20.09 m x = e y+52.268 −6.675 25.94 m (−89, −88) x = e y+52.278 −8.669 69.13 m x = e y+56.247 −6.892 100 m (−89, −86) x = e y+55.064 −7.225 109.62 m x = e y+52.805 −7.312 93.67 m (−77, −81) x = e y+50.305 −7.565 34.08 m x = e y+52.268 −6.675 57.83 m (1.95, 4) (0.95, 4) (1.45, 7) (0.95,11) (1.45, 17) (2.45, 23) (0.45, 24) (1.45, 27) y+52.268 highest velocity which must be detected to connect with this formula: S = Vt.

The S is the range of the RFID, and the t is the detection interval. The fastest velocity V = 6.67 m/s which is 24 km/h. It means in this experiment the fastest velocity is 24 km/h. The Simmah AR925 tachometer will be used to test the velocity of the simulation car. The Logitech C270 HD IPTV webcam instead of the camera on the warehouse. The first experiment the tachometer shows that the velocity is 67.52 m/min which is 4.0512 km/h.

The detection program is shown that: Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identification … 69 Table 7 Error rate comparison between VIRE and the empirical log-distance path loss model Real location, coordinate Error rate X of VIRE (%) Error rate Y of VIRE (%) Error rate Y of Log path loss (Channel A) (%) Error rate Y of Log path loss (Channel B) (%) (1.45, 2 m), (2,3) 1.15 2.43 134.5 37 (1.45, 3 m), (2,4) 3.15 10.65 78.3 43 (1.95, 4 m), (2.5,5) 17.00 2.86 47.8 40.5 (0.95„4 m), (1,5,5) 27.96 62.64 21.25 118.5 (1.45, 7 m), (2,8) 1.00 6.21 13.71 50.86 (0.95, 11 m), (1.5,12) 85.03 5.74 200 114.82 (1.45, 17 m), (2,18) 1.35 24.90 18.18 52.59 (2.45, 23 m), (3,24) 13.80 4.62 200.57 334.78 (0.45, 24 m), (1,25) 106.21 1.54 356.75 290.29 (1.45, 27 m), (2,28) 1.42 31.07 26.22 114.19 LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −83 −90, 6:18:09 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −77 −87, 6:18:12 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −75 −79, 6:18:15 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −54 −68, 6:19:18 pm With the VIRE location shows that in the 6:18:12 pm the simulation car is in the (18.329, 2.029) which means the car is 17 m from the camera.

In the camera the simulation car is near 17 m from the camera. The match test is successful. The second experiment the tachometer shows that the velocity is 141.62 m/min which is 8.4972 km/h. The detection program is shown that: LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −85 −85, 6:37:06 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −78 −84, 6:37:09 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −50 −50, 6:37:12 pm With the VIRE location shows that in the 6:37:09 pm the simulation car is in the (18.3014, 2.0252) which means the car is 17 m from the camera.

The third experiment the tachometer shows that the velocity is 555.24 m/min which is 33.3144 km/h. The detection program is shown that: LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −88 −79, 11:52:09 am 70 S. F. Wong and W. I. Ho LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −82 −84, 11:52:12 am LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −50 −50, 11:52:16 am LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −51 −53, 11:52:20 am With the camera it is found that the simulation car starts at 11:52:13 am., and the simulation car reaches destination before 11:52:16 am.

The VIRE location can only detect the location on the start and the end. It means that if the velocity is too high than 24 km/h, so it could not match the moving car on the RIFD range. In this experiment, it found out the limitation of dynamic situation. The fourth experiment the tachometer shows that the velocity is 253.2 m/min which is 15.192 km/h.

The detection program is shown that: LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −83 −88, 12:26:24 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −83 −88, 12:26:27 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −57 −68, 12:26:30 pm LOCATE00365566 1f0 760 −51 −50, 12:26:34 pm With the VIRE location shows that in the 12:26:30 pm the simulation car is in the (8.0747, 2.1636) which means the car is 7 m from the camera. The VIRE system can calculate the coordinate of object tags through the RFID Signal.

Combining the location of object tags in the scene, it can match the location of the moving object tags. If the velocity of car over 24 km/h, the system could not match the moving car on the RIFD range (20 m). 4 Conclusions In this paper, it integrated VIRE with LANDMARC system to locate the position of the simulation car that instead of AGV.

In reality, an open area on the high speed could greatly reduce the effect of the electromagnetic reflection, so as to enhance the accuracy of the positioning. When applied in practical, more readers can also be used to ensure the accuracy of the RFID signal and thus the direction and position of the target tags. Therefore in order to guarantee a better result when using this system on the road, readers with less restriction, i.e. faster detection speed and wider detection range should be used.

However in the open area the weather becomes another vital factor influencing the behaviour of the electromagnetic wave, for instance tempest, mist, thunderstorm etc. Because of the environment and technical restriction it was not able to simulate this kind of variety. Another route to achieve a better reliability and accuracy is to combine image analysis with the RFID signal.

This methodology requires a prerequisite database which records the information of the simulation cars in the respective tags. In this way the system would filter incompatible matching pair when a tag is detected within the range. As a result, the objectives tags are matched by the VIRE system which can more accurate than the LANDMARC system and Log-path loss models.

Moreover, the hardware cost is same as the LANDMARC system and VIRE system can improve Integrating RFID Signal with Scene for Automatic Identification … 71 the accuracy under the same situation as LANDMARC. Meanwhile, the estimated position of objective tags is more accurate because it works with virtual tags to define the more unknown position.

Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the funding support by University of Macau under conference grant and The Science and Technology Development Fund, Macau SAR (File no. 0027/2018/ASC and 0041/2018/AIR). The authors also acknowledge Mr. Lok Ka Iat, Mr. Wang Jun Feng, and Mr. Wu Bi Xin for their support in data collection. References Andersen JB, Rappaport TS, Yoshida S (1995) Propagation measurements and models for wireless communications channels. IEEE Commun. Mag.

33(1):42–49 Giustia I, Cepolina EM, Cangialosi E, Aquaro D, Caroti G, Piemonte A (2019) Mitigation of human error consequences in general cargo handler logistics: impact of RFID implementation. Comput. Indus Eng 137:1–11 (106038) Haykin S (2005) Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless communications. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun 23:201–220 Ho WI, Wong SF (2012) Noise factor of RFID-aided positioning.

Int J Electr Commun Eng 6(7):684–689 Hong SK, So YS (2009) Cost of ownership model for the RFID logistics system applicable to u-city. Eur J Oper Res 194:406–417 Iskander MF, Yun Z (2002) Propagation prediction models for wireless communication systems. IEEE Trans Microw Theory Techn 50:662–673 Jain S, Sabharwal A, Chandra S (2010) An improvised localization scheme using active RFID for accurate tracking in smart homes.

In: 12th international conference on computer modelling and simulation, pp 51–56 Jiang XJ, Liu Y, Wang XL (2009) An enhanced approach of indoor location sensing using active RFID. In: International conference on information engineering, pp 169–172 Kirch M, Poenicke O, Richter K (2017) RFID in Logistics and production—applications, research and visions for smart logistics zones.

Procedia Eng 178:526–533 Li JH, Zhang GM, Yu L, Wang ZX, Zhang J (2013) An advanced RFID localization algorithm based on region division and error compensation. KSII Trans Internet Inform Syst 7(4):670–691 (2013) Liu BH, Otis B, Challa S, Axon P, Chou CT, Jha S (2006) On the fading and shadowing effects for wireless sensor networks.

In 2006 IEEE international conference on mobile adhoc and sensor systems (MASS), pp 51–60 Oztekin A, Pajouh FM, Delen D, Swim LK (2010) An RFID network design methodology for asset tracking in healthcare. Decis Support Syst 49:100–109 Sharma PK, Singh R (2010) Comparative analysis of propagation path loss models with field measured data.

Int J Eng Sci Technol 2:2008–2013 Ukkonen L, Sydanheimo L, Kivikoski M (2005) Effects of metallic plate size on the performance of microstrip patch-type tag antennas for passive RFID. IEEE Antennas Wirel Propag Lett 4:410–413 Wong SF, Yu Z (2019a) The mobile robot anti-disturbance vSLAM navigation algorithm based on RBF neural network. Procedia Manuf 38:400–407 Wong SF, Yu Z (2019b) Flexsim-based modulation and simulation for logistics batch picking.

In: Proceedings of 2019 the 3rd international conference on software and e-business (ICSEB 2019), pp 141–145 72 S. F. Wong and W. I. Ho Zhong RY, Huang GQ, Lan SL, Dai QY, Xu C, Zhang T (2015) A big data approach for logistics trajectory discovery from RFID-enabled production data. Int J Prod Econ 165:260–272 Zhou WH, Jiang ND, Yan CC (2019) Research on anti-collision algorithm of RFID tags in logistics system.

Procedia Comput Sci 154:460–467 Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse Kamila Kluska and Patrycja Hoffa-D˛abrowska Abstract The main goal of this chapter is to present a mechanism for managing the movement of vehicles in a warehouse. The logic for managing two means of warehouse transportation is part of a research project for Zrembud Cieszyn, located in Poland. The company needs simulation to help design and verify rules for coordinating vehicle movement and communication.

The logic was written for warehouse transport using forklifts and a specialized, new type of automatic guided vehicle (named Transfer Unit) in two different warehouse systems. The approach continuously determines vehicle positions based on controlling markers, traffic restrictions, communication, order assignment, and safety requirements in many different warehouse configurations (including rack parameters and inbound/outbound buffer locations).

The method considers a new type of storage, referred to as drawer racks. The research work uses actual data, rules and technical information from the company. 1 Introduction This chapter addresses one stage of simulation modelling of storage systems and supports the innovative design of a new semi-automatic storage system. The system consists of racks placed on metal frames (called drawers, platforms) that are turned 90° relative to the transport corridor (Pawlewski and Kunc 2019).

Static platforms with single racks are placed at the end of each row with double platforms between them on which two racks are placed. Due to the impeded access to storage spaces in the double rack, an AGV vehicle (Transfer Unit, which slides in and out of the platforms perpendicular to the corridor) is implemented into the system. In order to reach the rack, the AGV moves under metal frames where the racks stand.

In order to access the racks, an AGV moves under the platform, lifts and slides it out. After loading/unloading of containers, the platform with racks is pushed back into its K. Kluska (B) · P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska Poznan University of Technology, Jacka Rychlewskiego St. 2, 60-965 Poznan, Poland e-mail: kamila.kluska@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_5 73 74 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska Fig. 1 The view of prototype of drawer rack system (Source https://zrembud.com.pl/nowe-sys temy-regalowe/) default position in the rack row and is lowered. Implementation of described concept is shown in Fig. 1.

The most important difference between the SRS (drawer rack system) and SRR (row racking system) systems results from the dynamic structure of the SRS system and the static structure of the SRR system. The applied structures directly result in differences in the availability of loads in both systems and in the structure of racks. Loads are permanently available in SRR as racks have a fixed position on the warehouse layout.

In the SRS system, loads are not available due to the perpendicular positioning of racks relative to the corridor and their placement next to each other. Access to loads is only possible if the rack slides out towards the corridor. This is possible through the use of a new storage structure—placing racks on movable metal platforms.

Changing the position of the rack also causes the change of the position of stopping points (located on the sides of the rack), reduction of the corridor capacity and even its complete blocking. This creates new challenges related to SKU allocation, replenishment, picking, determining how to manage forklifts and AGVs, and the principles of their cooperation.

The methodology considers both traditional row racking systems (SRR and automatic drawer racking systems (SRS), as well as handling orders related to warehouse stocking (PZ) and shipments (WZ). The warehouse structure can be freely modified depending on the users’ requirements. Algorithms for generating routes for forklifts and AGVs are adapted to consider operation in any type of warehouse structure. The stages for developing the methodology are presented in Fig. 2.

The first two stages are for defining the project and preparing information and structures needed to build an automatic warehouse generation mechanism. The next three steps are the process of building this mechanism. Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 75 Fig. 2 The stages of building the methodology of simulation modeling of storage systems.

Source Own work The next two steps include the construction of a mechanism for automatically generating a transport network consisting of various kinds of checkpoints (driveway points). These points guarantee traffic safety and enable its management.

Checkpoints designate: • forklifts paths between corridors, • places of forklift entry and exit to/from the corridor, • forklifts paths between rows of racks, • AGV paths under rows of shelves, 76 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska • points in the corridor to which AGVs slide out the platforms with racks to allow forklifts access to the storage locations and points that determine the path of the AGV to return to the row of racks when the platform is pulled back, • places in front of the racks where forklifts stop to perform loading and unloading operations, • stopping places for the forklifts while they are waiting for an AGV to stop moving, • detour path around the extended AGV (with platform) for a forklift.

The next steps in building the methodology (marked with a blue frame in Fig. 1) relate to the definition of the principles of communication and cooperation between AGV and forklifts. This is the basis for the automatic management of their work. This mechanism is the subject of this chapter. The last stages of building the methodology include preparing mechanisms for generating charts (analysis of results) and testing the built tool. Every simulation project requires a clear definition of goals.

It also requires the definition of decision variables and performance measures. Through these activities, developers know how to evaluate the alternative solutions, what is being assessed in the alternatives, and what factors to modify to obtain the best result. The objective of the project is to achieve maximum efficiency of the warehouse system by having fork trucks travel the smallest distance and requiring the smallest area of the warehouse.

The most important decision variable is the warehouse structure, i.e., its layout. A second key decision variable is the number of forklifts operating in the system. The main performance measures that are used to assess alternatives and to drive the simulation experiments are: • System performance: for a given list of transport orders, the time it takes to complete this list. • Distance travelled by forklifts and transfer units (AGVs).

Another measure of performance, that is evaluated outside of the simulation experiments is the total warehouse area that is calculated as the warehouse layout changes. The main goal of this chapter is to present a mechanism that manages the movement of vehicles in semi-automated and traditional warehouse system that adapts to the warehouse layout and the locations of inbound and outbound buffers. The chapter is organized in five sections.

Section 2 provides a literature review about planning and managing automated vehicles. Section 3 discusses the methodology in the context of simulating storage systems. Section 4 describes the logic for managing vehicles in warehouses that use SRS and SRR systems. Section 5 describes the simulation experiments and their results. Section 6 provides conclusions and discusses future work.

Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 77 2 Literature Review There are many different means of transport in storage areas, i.e. cranes, conveyors, transport trucks (Raczyk 2009), hand trolleys, forklifts, stacker cranes, and AGVs. Depending on the type of stored goods, type of warehouse, owned storage facilities and the level of automation, various means of transport are used.

Globalization, the pace of production, and the level of technology and automation all impact the means of transport that are used in operating storage areas. As process automation increases, there is also an increase in the use of autonomous industrial trucks (Polten and Emde 2020; Saffar et al. 2017). The literature confirms the growing trend in AGV applications in storage areas.

Searching the SCOPUS database for the words “automated guided vehicle” and “warehouse” in tittle/abstract/keyword, the number of articles was 200. Figure 3 presents the number of articles authored by year until 2019. In recent years, the popularity of using drones in warehouse-picking area has increased, as indicated by Derpich et al. (2018), Perussi et al. (2019), Betti Sorbelli et al. (2019). The automation of warehouse processes is associated with automated storage and retrieval system (AS/RS).

A discussion of AS/RS systems is found in (Van den Berg and Gademann (2000). and a comparison of AS/RS and AVS/RS systems is provided in Ekren and Heragu (2011). Various methods for managing the work of AGVs and planning their routes are found in the following: • a quadratic optimization method for coordinating AGVs (Digani et al. 2019), • a time-efficient approach to solve conflicts and deadlocks for scheduling AGVs (Failed 2018), Fig.

3 The number of articles about automated guided vehicles in warehouses by year in SCOPUS base. Source SCOPUS base (13 March 2020) 78 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska • multi-AGVs conflict-free routing and dynamic dispatching strategies for automated warehouses (Li et al. 2019), • using two adaptive genetic algorithms and a multi-adaptive genetic algorithm to optimize the task scheduling of AGVs (Liu et al.

2019), • a neural network-based algorithm with genetic training for a combined job and energy management for AGVs (Pagani et al. 2018), • fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis applied to the design of a network flow of AGVs (Llopis-Albert et al. 2019), • a novel tabu search algorithm for routing problems (Xing et al. 2020), • a time–space network model for path planning (Yin et al. 2019), • collision-free route planning for multiple AGVs in automated warehouses (Zhang et al. 2018).

In case of AGV, many articles focus on routing, network planning, and collision avoidance. 3 Methodology The mechanism for managing forklifts and AGVs that is described in this paper is a part of a larger simulation modelling methodology for storage systems that is contained within the LogABS software. LogABS is a 3D-based simulation software that is dedicated to the design and redesign of factory intralogistics.

Production planning, workstation and production line balancing, analysis of work ergonomics and yamazumi analysis are also feasible using LogABS (https://logabs.com/). The most important reasons for choosing this software are: ease of use, access to set of tools supporting the creation and modification of the factory layouts, built-in mechanisms for assessing value-added and performing ergonomic analyses, and it uses a language that is understood by production engineers.

The use of the mechanism for automatic management of forklifts and AGVs is the stage of the methodology that is highlighted in Fig. 4. The first four stages of the methodology relate to the procedures necessary to automatically generate a warehouse. The next two steps marked in Fig. 3 relate to the mechanism for managing the operation of vehicles in a simulation model.

These steps concern the input of material flow data, the automatic processing of this data for the current generation of forklift and AGV truck routes during the simulation experiment (Pawlewski 2018b, 2019). Routes are generated by taking into account the spatial relationships of vehicles and their communication. The methodology also includes generating graphs that display the outcome of simulation experiments.

The implementation of the stages related to the automatic generation of warehouses and the development of charts for the presentation of results, is associated with the stages of methodology construction presented in Fig. 1 and is the subject of other papers. The use of a mechanism for automatic management of forklifts and AGVs in a warehouse requires. Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 79 Fig. 4 The stages of methodology for automatically building simulation models of storage systems.

Source Own work 3.1 Entering a Series of Input Data into the WZ_PZ_SRS and WZ_PZ_SRR Tables, Which Have the Same Structure The tables are used to determine the different types of flows in warehouses that can be simulated. An example of the WZ_PZ_SRS table is shown in Fig. 5. The type of transport order is specified in the first column of the table. PZ means the order related to accepting the load into the warehouse, i.e. transporting the load from the input buffer to the rack.

WZ means a release order from the warehouse, i.e. transport of load from the rack to the output buffer. The SKU column designates the load index to be transported. This is information is for the user and does not affect the operation of the mechanism. 80 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska Fig. 5 WZ_PZ_SRS data table for drawer racking systems. Source Own work Address is the name of the storage location using the customer’s notation.

Address LogABS is an automatically generated name for an object in the simulation model; it is in the notation of the LogABS simulation program (Pawlewski 2018a). This address is based on the Address column that uses the customer’s notation. The Buffer column is the name of the buffer (along with the specification of the storage place number) that forms the link during the flow implementation.

Loads are picked from this buffer during the execution of a PZ order or are dropped to this buffer during the execution of a WZ order. The Status column specifies the status of an order. If an order is not completed, the status is 0 (i.e. the order has not been executed). After completing the order, the status changes to a value of 1. Based on this, the user can see what orders are completed as a simulation runs.

After completing a simulation experiment, the user can also check whether any of the orders have been missed, e.g. as a result of defining an address that does not exist in the generated warehouse. 3.2 Determining the Variant of the Inbound and Outbound Buffers Arrangement Relative to the Storage Racks The setting options currently available in the mechanism are shown in Table 1. In Table 1 the four locations of in and out buffers are presented.

The green rectangles in the figures labelled “IN” denote an inbound buffer. Orange rectangles denoted with “OUT” represent outbound buffers. The blue areas are rows of racks.

Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 81 Table 1 The variants of the inbound and outbound buffer arrangement relative to the storage racks Variant 1 Variant 2 Variant 3 Variant 4 Source Own work Buffers can be located on the left side of the racks (variant 1), on the right side of the racks (variant 3) or separately on the left and right side (variant 2 and 4). Establishing the variant of setting buffers relative to the storage area determines the correct operation of the algorithm, i.e.

the faultless indication of forklift trucks’ paths through the warehouse during the execution of transport orders. 4 Logic of the Vehicle Management Mechanism The most important assumptions for the algorithm for the SRS system: 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. A maximum of one forklift in a corridor. When there is a forklift in the corridor, no other forklift can enter the corridor to process an order. Allocation of transport orders to forklifts is based on the availability of forklifts and corridors.

A list of orders is analyzed in turn, and a WZ order is selected for each PZ order (and vice versa), whose execution will take place from: (1) the same rack, (2) another rack located on the same platform, (3) another a rack in the same corridor in the same row, or (4), another rack in the same corridor but on the other side (in a different row). The search order is carried out according to priorities.

If a transport order cannot be made, the forklift leaves the corridor and waits in a parking area. The system is operated by forklifts and AGVs. 82 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska 6. Only one AGV truck can move under one row of racks, which is permanently assigned to it. AGVs have priority over forklifts. When an AGV moves, a forklift must not enter within a safety range of one meter from its edges. If necessary, the forklift waits for the AGV to end its movement.

Forklift have the ability to communicate (send signals) to AGVs and vice versa. Vehicles move according to control markers (driveway points) on the floor. Only one vehicle can stay on a given marker at a time. The maximum capacity of a forklift is one transport unit (one container). The maximum capacity of an AGV is one platform. All forklifts have the same motion parameters and capabilities. AGV trucks have the same motion parameters. Each vehicle can carry out only one transport order at a time.

The capacity of inbound and outbound buffers is unlimited. The capacity of one storage place on a rack is one transport unit (one container). Loads are always available on racks. It is not possible for a transport order not to be carried out due to the lack of a load on a rack. After a forklift has finished working with the racks on a double platform, the AGV must slide it into the rack row to its default location. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.

The most important assumptions for the algorithm for the SRR system: 1. The maximum number of forklifts that can be in a corridor at the same time is set by the user. When the maximum number of forklifts are in a corridor, no additional forklifts can enter the corridor to complete an order. 2. Allocation of transport orders to forklifts is based on the availability of forklifts and corridors. 3.

A list of orders is analyzed in turn, and a WZ order is selected for each PZ order (and vice versa), whose execution will take place from (1) the same rack, (2) another a rack in the same corridor in the same row, or (3) another rack in the same corridor but on the other side but in a different row. The search order is carried out according to priority values. 4. In the absence of a transport order that can be made, the forklift truck leaves the corridor and waits in a parking area. 5.

The system is only operated by forklifts. 6. Vehicles move according to control markers (driveway points) on the floor. Only one vehicle can stay on a given marker at a time. 7. The maximum capacity of a forklift is one transport unit (one container). 8. All forklifts have the same motion parameters and capabilities. 9. Each vehicle can carry out only one transport order at a time. 10. The capacity of inbound and outbound buffers is unlimited. 11.

The capacity of one storage place on a rack is one transport unit (one container). 12. Loads are always available on racks. It is not possible for a transport order not to be carried out due to the lack of a load on a rack.

Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 83 The most important part of the vehicle management mechanism are algorithms that: • load and process data concerning transport orders, • observe the availability of forklifts and AGVs, • manage the allocation of transport orders (by analyzing and selecting orders according to priorities and allocating them for execution depending on the availability of transport resources) for forklifts and AGVs, • generate vehicle work routes that enable proper vehicle movement and communication, meet the assumptions, and take into account the work coordination, • record the execution of individual transport orders and the entire list of orders (completion of vehicle operations), • manage the movement of vehicles to their default locations when idle.

4.1 The Algorithm for Managing Forklifts and AGVs in the SRS System The algorithm is shown in Fig. 6 and is divided into six modules. The first module is responsible for activating the algorithm, loading and processing the data concerning transport orders, as well as checking the number of available forklifts and AGVs. This module also includes a system preventing activation of the mechanism in the event when the drawer warehouse was not generated by the user.

The second module is a continuation of the first module. This part of the algorithm manages transport orders—their selection and assignment to available forklifts and AGVs. After assigning the transport order, the transition to the third module follows. In the event of completion of all transport orders from the list, the transition to module six follows. In the third module analysis of the assigned task is taken place.

The algorithm checks in turn: • variant of space organization in the warehouse, • is the address in the transport order on the single or double racking platform, • from which side of the double rack the load will be picked up, • how far the double rack will slide out (how many storage places in relation to the depth of the platform), as well as • what is the type of order (PZ or WZ).

All this information is necessary to specify in the fourth module: • whether it is necessary to use (activate) the AGV truck, • what access path to set for vehicles, • how routes should be generated, • what number of routes is needed, • at which moment vehicles will exchange signals initiating the movement. 84 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska Fig. 6 The algorithm for managing forklifts and AGVs in the SRS system.

Source Own study with use LogABS program The fourth module generates routes for forklifts and AGVs, activate forklifts and also the mechanism embedded in the fifth module. In the fifth module observation of the execution of the transport order by the vehicles is taking place. When the vehicles complete the generated routes (they finish carrying out activities related to the implementation of a given transport order), the mechanism will record it and set them as available.

Availability means that the algorithm can resume the implementation of the second module and thus allocate another order for implementation. The sixth module is activated when all orders from the list are completed. This module checks if all vehicles have completed their movement. If yes, it generates Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 85 routes that allow vehicles to return to parking lots and activates them to execute these routes.

4.2 The Algorithm for Managing Forklifts in the SRR System The SRR system does not use AGV trucks, but only forklifts. The algorithm works analogously to the algorithm for the SRS system and has been divided into six modules. The first and second modules works analogously to the algorithm for the SRS system, without consideration of AGV’s availability. After assigning the transport order, the transition to the third module follows. In the third module analysis of the assigned task is taking place.

The algorithm checks in turn: • variant of space organization in the warehouse, • what is the type of order (PZ or WZ). All this information is necessary to specify in module four: • what access path to set for vehicles, • how routes should be generated, • what number of routes is needed. In the fourth module, routes for forklifts are generated, forklifts are activated and the mechanism embedded in the fifth module is activated.

The fifth and sixth modules work in a similar way to the modules included in the algorithm for the SRS system, but they omit the observation of AGVs activity. 4.3 High-Level Language for Vehicles Routes High-level language is used to record routes performed by forklifts and AGVs. This language must make it possible to model the logic of forklift operation in a way that correctly recreates the procedure of loading and unloading the rack with a forklift.

The recording of activities on the route must enable: • moving the vehicle in accordance with the relevant rules and the right path, • finding addresses in model space, • picking and putting away containers at designated addresses, • communicate with other traffic contractors in a given space. Such conditions are met by the LogABS (Pawlewski 2018a, b) language in which logic is written using high-level instructions.

LogABS uses a set of 64 different instructions that, written one after the other, form a work itinerary. The structure of the LogABS instruction is as follows (Pawlewski 2019): 86 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska • Address (location of the object to which the instruction relates), • Instruction (activity name), • Parameter (field in which duration or quantity is defined depending on the type of instruction).

The following LogABS instructions are used to write the logic of vehicles: • Travel—go to the designated place in the model space (without load), • TravelLoaded—go to the designated place in the model space (with load), • Load—load a specified number of parts or containers directly from the location, • Unload—unload a specified number of parts/containers directly to the location, • Call—activates the route saved in the table, • ReadyForTask—set the readiness status.

It means that the operator has finished his work and can accept new order, • StartOperator—initiate the work of the operator, • RepTime—save time. Based on the entries, work time charts are generated, • PickUp—lift the racks located in the drawer—lift the drawer, • Lower—put the drawer on the floor. Logic of transport vehicles work is built from the LogABS instructions listed above. A fragment of the forklift route is shown in Fig. 7, while a fragment of the AGV route is shown in Fig. 8. Fig.

7 A fragment of the forklift route recorded with use LogABS language. Source Own study with use LogABS program Fig. 8 A fragment of the AGV route recorded with use LogABS language. Source Own study with use LogABS program Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 87 5 Simulation Experiments A number of computer simulations were carried out for the described simulation model in order to compare the SRS and SRR systems. For the purposes of the paper, three experiments are compared.

In each experiment, the arrangement of racks is different, while the total storage capacity for the SRS and SRR systems is the same. The rack settings for each experiment are shown in Table 2. In respective simulation variants, the number of rows and the number of racks in a row were changed. Basic information is presented in Table 3. For each experiment, the distance travelled by all vehicles in a given simulation was compiled. The results are summarized in Table 4.

It can be noticed that each time the distance travelled in the SRR system was lower by 218 m, 1,156 m and 706 m respectively. In addition, the time of execution of 70 PZ and WZ orders was measured. The results are shown in Table 5. In all cases this time was shorter for the SRR system.

Comparing the SRS and SRR systems based on the three experiments, it can be seen that: • the area occupied by a certain number of locations is smaller in the case of the SRS system, which is based on condensed racking in the case of the SRS system, • the distance travelled by all vehicles is lower in the case of the SRR system, • the time of completing 70 PZ/WZ orders is shorter in the SRR system.

Table 2 Rack setting for the SRS and SRR systems in each (respective) experiment E. no SRS 1 2 3 Source Own work SRR 88 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska Table 3 Basic SRR and SRS system settings for each experiment Experiment 1 SRS Experiment 2 Experiment 3 SRR SRS SRR SRS SRR Number of rows of 6 racks 11 4 8 8 20 Number of racks 12 within a single row 12 19 18 10 7 Total capacity of warehouse (no.

of locations) 2640 2640 2880 2880 2880 2800 Width of storage area (m) 32 44 48 66 25 25,5 Length of storage area (m) 34 32 22,5 22,5 44,86 56,6 Storage area (m2 ) 1088 1408 1080 1485 1121,5 1443,3 Number of forklifts 2 2 2 2 4 4 Number of AGV vehicles 6 0 4 0 8 0 Source Own work Table 4 Distance travelled by vehicles in experiments Experiment 1 SRS Experiment 2 SRR Distance 5276,851 traveled by forklifts and transfer units (m) SRS 5052,86 5972,205 Experiment 3 SRR SRS SRR 4816,567 4318,776 3613,194 Source Own work Table 5 The time of execution of 70 PZ and WZ orders Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3 SRS SRR SRS SRR SRS SRR Time of completing 34,32 the list of 70 tasks PZ/WZ (min) 29,61 38,27 28,38 17,73 11,94 Source Own work Logic for Management of Vehicles at Warehouse 89 6 Conclusions and Future Directions The paper describes the mechanism of managing forklifts and AGVs work, which is an important part of the simulation modelling methodology for storage systems.

The mechanism enables the user without programming skills to build a simulation model of two storage systems and support advanced algorithms from the level of two tables with a simple structure. Algorithms automatically adjust the way forklifts move to modelled storage system structures. The tool allows to enter data on the flow of materials and automatically processes them to model transport processes and vehicle operation logic, including their communication and complex decisionmaking processes.

The result of building the mechanism is the execution of orders in simulation models. To sum up the results of simulation experiments, in terms of time and distance, the SRR system prevails over the SRS system. However, it is worth considering both cases. Depending on whether the speed of order execution or area occupied by the same number of locations is more important, different rack storage system will be chosen.

Both the SRS and SRR systems are characterized by their specific advantages and functionalities, as well as limitations. Therefore, it is worth using simulation tools that allow comparing both concepts in the virtual world, and then select the most suitable variant for the enterprise. Further development of the research involves building a mechanism for collecting, processing and presenting results in the form of charts.

To increase the usability of the methodology, it is planned to expand the mechanism of managing the operation of trucks by including other types of vehicles and enabling the operation of other storage systems. An important stage of the planned methodology evolution is the development of mechanisms enabling the implementation of resource and process cost accounting. References Betti Sorbelli F, Coro F, Pinotti CM, Shende A (2019) Automated picking system employing a drone.

In: Proceedings—15th annual international conference on distributed computing in sensor systems, DCOSS 2019, May 2019, Article number 8804800, pp 633–640. https://doi.org/10. 1109/DCOSS.2019.00115 Derpich I, Miranda D, Sepulveda J (2018) Using drones in a warehouse with minimum energy consumption. In: 2018 7th international conference on computers communications and control (ICCCC). IEEE.

https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCCC.2018.8390444 Digani V, Hsieh MA, Sabattini L et al (2019) Coordination of multiple AGVs: a quadratic optimization method. Auton Robot 43:539–555. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-018-9730-9 Ekren BY, Heragu SS (2011) Simulation based performance comparison of AVS/RS and AS/RS. In: IIE annual conference proceedings, pp 1–7 https://logabs.com/.

Accessed 6 May 2020 Li X, Zhang C, Yang W, Qi M (2019) Multi-AGVs conflict-free routing and dynamic dispatching strategies for automated warehouses. In: Kim K, Kim H (eds) Mobile and wireless technology 2018, ICMWT 2018. Lecture notes in electrical engineering, vol 513.

Springer, Singapore 90 K. Kluska and P. Hoffa-D˛abrowska Liu Y, Ji S, Su Z, Guo D (2019) Multi-objective AGV scheduling in an automatic sorting system of an unmanned (intelligent) warehouse by using two adaptive genetic algorithms and a multi-adaptive genetic algorithm. PloS One 14(12) Llopis-Albert C, Rubio F, Valero F (2019) Fuzzy-set qualitative comparative analysis applied to the design of a network flow of automated guided vehicles for improving business productivity.

J Bus Res 101, August 2019, 737–742 Pagani P, Colling D, Furmans K (2018) A neural network-based algorithm with genetic training for a combined job and energy management for AGVs. Logist J: Proc 2018. https://doi.org/10.2195/ lj_Proc_pagani_en_201811_01 Pawlewski P (2018a) Script language to describe agent’s behaviors.

In: Highlights of practical applications of agents, multi-agent systems, and complexity: the PAAMS collection: international workshops of PAAMS 2018, Toledo, Spain, 20–22 June 2018, Proceedings, red. Javier Bajo, Patrycja Hoffa-D˛abrowska (WIZ). Springer, 2018, pp 137–148 Pawlewski P (2018b) Methodology for layout and intralogistics redesign using simulation. In: Rabe M, Juan AA, Mustafee N, Skoogh A, Jain S, Johansson B (eds) Proceedings of the 2018 winter simulation conference.

IEEE Press, 2018, pp 3193–3204 Pawlewski P (2019) Built-in lean management tools in simulation modelling. In: 2019 winter simulation conference (WSC), National Harbor, MD, USA, pp 2665–2676 Pawlewski P, Kunc T (2019) Using agent base simulation to model operations in semi-automated warehouse. In: Highlights of practical applications of survivable agents and multi-agent systems: the PAAMS collection: international workshops of PAAMS 2019 Ávila, Spain, 26–28 June 2019, Proceedings, red.

Fernando De La Prieta, Alfonso González-Briones, Paweł Pawlewski (WIZ), Davide Calvaresi, Elena Del Val, Fernando Lopes, Vincente Julian, Eneko Osaba, Ramón Sánchez-Iborra. Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham, Switzerland, pp 50–61 Perussi JB, Gressler F, Seleme R (2019) Supply chain 4.0: autonomous vehicles and equipment to meet demand. Int J Supply Chain Manag 8(4), August 2019, 33–41.

ISSN 20513771 Polten L, Emde S (2020) Scheduling automated guided vehicles in very narrow aisle warehouses, Omega. Available online 23 January 2020, 102204, In Press, Corrected Proof, Elsevier.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2020.102204 Raczyk R (2009) środki transportu bliskiego i magazynowania, Wydawnictwo Politechniki Poznańskiej, Poznań.

ISBN 978-83-7143-828-8 Saffar S, Jamaludin Z, Jafar F (2017) Investigating the influences of automated guided vehicles (AGVs) as material transportation for automotive assembly process. J Mech Eng SI 4(1), 1 August 2017, 47–60. ISSN 18235514 Tai R, Wang J, Tian W, Chen W, Wang H, Zhou Y (2018) A time-efficient approach to solve conflicts and deadlocks for scheduling AGVs in warehousing applications.

In: 2018 IEEE international conference on real-time computing and robotics (RCAR), Kandima, Maldives, pp 166–171 Van den Berg JP, Gademann AJRM (2000) Simulation study of an automated storage/retrieval system. Int J Prod Res 38(6):1339–1356 Xing L, Liu Y, Li H, Wu C-C, Lin W-C, Chen X (2020) A novel tabu search algorithm for multi-AGV routing problem. Mathematics 8(2), 1 February 2020, Article number 279. Yin S, Xin J (2019) Path planning of multiple agvs using a time-space network model.

In: 2019 34rd youth academic annual conference of chinese association of automation (YAC), Jinzhou, China, pp 73–78 Zhang Z, Guo Q, Chen J, Yuan P (2018) Collision-free route planning for multiple agvs in an automated warehouse based on collision classification.

IEEE Access 6:26022–26035 The Possibilities of Digitizing the Preparation Process for Shipping Batteries in a Distribution Warehouse—A Case Study Łukasz Brzeziński and Magdalena Krystyna Wyrwicka Abstract Modern technologies are gaining more and more importance in supply chain management, leading to the transformation of its three elements: network structure, business processes and management components.

Enterprises use the potential of digital technologies as sources of value and transform supply chains to varying degrees and in various ways. Certainly, the development of digital technologies is one of the sources of building competitive advantage of enterprises and supply chains in the twenty-first century and is an important subject of research. Digitalization of storage related processes can contribute to the organization receiving multiple benefits—in terms of time and cost.

This type of solution will be discussed as a part of the case study in this article. The aim of chapter was the analysis of the effects of digitisation of the sub-process of preparing goods for shipment in the distribution warehouse (including picking, labelling, quantity and quality control, packaging and loading).

The analysis of the research material was based on the use of the following research methods: Exide case study, key performance indicators (KPI’s), as well as elements of investment profitability assessment (ROI).

Keywords Distribution warehouse · Digitization of processes · Digitization in storage · Improvement of storage processes 1 Introduction New business circumstances are related to openness to way of operating that are different from the traditional ones (Barton and Thomas 2009; Aztori et al. 2010; Bughin et al. 2011; Columbus 2015).

The ability to efficiently use the potential of digital technologies and the digital competences of organisations are becoming the Ł. Brzeziński (B) Faculty of Management and Logistics, Poznan School of Logistics, 61755 Poznan, Poland e-mail: lukasz.brzezinski@wsl.com.pl M. K. Wyrwicka Faculty of Engineering Management, Poznan University of Technology, 60965 Poznan, Poland © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_6 91 92 Ł. Brzeziński and M. K. Wyrwicka source of competitive edge of entire sectors and economies. In 2020, the global economy saturation level will reach 25%, whereas in 2005 that was only 15% (Concoran and Datta 2016).

Contemporary logistics (an in particular the functioning of distribution warehouses), which has already become global in its nature, must be flexibility and capable quick identification of business chances brought about by new tech, including the ability to use all available information (Ballou 2007; Carmichael et al. 2011). The ever-growing scope, complexity and dynamism of logistics processes fosters the need to implement new solutions in logistics.

Logistics is affecting, directly and indirectly, the economy to a higher and higher degree, and the changes within it (Barton and Thomas 2009; Detlor 2010; Coyle et al. 2010; Boyes 2016) create new challenges for logistics to face. The growth of informational technologies and digitisation of warehousing processes have a massive impact on the way enterprises and entire economy sectors function.

Among enterprises, these relations can be seen on three operating levels: (a) within the scope of creating value in new business relations; (b) within the scope of creating value in processes that use the concept of managing the customer’s experience and (c) within the scope of creating the enterprise’s fundamental capabilities (Dörner and Edelman 2015).

In every sphere of business activity, new tech can support its growth, on one hand, and change this specific sector and the prevailing balance of forces, on the other one. Some enterprises are thus forced to expand their activity to another sector, some others to find new business models creating value in their present sectors. Such approach aims to bring benefits not only within the area of improving production processes, but also in logistics and transport.

Increasingly more often, both directly and indirectly, the new tech impact logistics within logistics processes, driving its never stopping evolution and new challenges (Wodnicka 2019).

The phenomena affecting the transformation of logistics include, among else, the ones related to economic development in global scale (globalisation and internationalisation of activity) and the digitisation era combined with the fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0), which bring about transformations in the way enterprises cooperate and the control of processes in the supply chain in the scale of industries and sectors (Chopra and Meindl 2007; Johnson et al. 2008; Wood 2010; Wu et al.

2016; Uton 2017).

It is therefore worth listing such phenomena as: • the use of ICT solutions, including satellite and radio identification system that enable the coordination of the flows of products and information in time and space; • standardisation and automation of economic processes, their processes require increased discipline of deliveries and continuity of stock optimisation processes; • product customisation, allowing the personalisation of products, requires that a higher quantity of them must be in turnover, there are more selection options, the quality and shopping convenience are accelerated, all of which implicates production flexibility, as evidenced by signals from the market, as well as the search for and development of distribution channels; The Possibilities of Digitizing the Preparation Process … 93 • the higher number of large area shops that keep lower stocks and require better service from their suppliers; • the change of nature of distribution processes which, going beyond the current limits of enterprises, require the collection and analysis of data, the expansion of the chain of information resources for integrating, in real time, the data from external business partners, suppliers or clients; • the expansion of forms of ties among manufacturers, the implementation of new business model concepts, translating into the rising tendency to outsource logistics services (the increase in the share of external service costs in the business cost structure, the alteration of the material cost structure and stock maintenance, the reduction of investment outlays and the increase of variable costs).

This results from the pressure to reduce costs as an element of the growth of competitiveness of businesses (Szukalski and Wodnicka 2016); • the reduction of the market life cycle of products which imposes temporal discipline on the production process and the process of implementation of new products, because clients do not want to wait long for new or improved products.

Based on the above, a conclusion can be made that the challenges faced by logistics are not just limited to transport or warehousing, but are also related to processes of managing and coordinating activities among companies within the supply chain, in real time—the ability to react to the rapidly changing demand.

Industry 4.0, mentioned before, means the integration of smart solutions covering the equipment and IT resources, new work methods and new roles of human resources (Schwab 2016; Word Economic Forum 2016a, b).

The diffusion of Industry 4.0 is connected to three phenomena (Paprocki 2016): • the common digitisation and maintaining continuous communication between individuals themselves, between individuals and devices and between devices themselves; • the increasingly more often implemented disruptive innovations that allow incremental increase of efficiency and effectiveness of functioning of the social and economic system; • achieving such a level of development of machinery that they gain the ability to behave autonomously thanks to the use of artificial intelligence in their control processes.

The rapid acceleration of developments in IT and the transposition of their use lead to the formulation of the fourth industrial revolution thesis, although it is vocally disputed whether to consider it evolution or transformation (Neubauer 2011; Cohen and Kietzmann 2014). For quite some time, ICT have been reaching a more mature form, combining physical systems with the Internet of Things, Artificial Intelligence, Big Data and cloud computing.

The awareness of the ground-breaking nature of technological solutions and the vision of application of new possibilities become a challenge for many businesses and encourages to change the paradigm of conducting business.

The following are listed among the fundamental premises (Still 2018): 94 Ł. Brzeziński and M. K. Wyrwicka • global networks connecting production plants, machinery and warehouse management systems; • autonomous exchange of information in cyber-physical systems, within which the equipment and data bases may operate jointly and control each other; • identifiable, real time localized “smart products” that know their own history, status and paths for reaching their destinations.

Digitization makes information and communication available anywhere, anytime, within any context, and for any user using any device and type of access (Rappa 2004; Manyika et al. 2013; Kayikci 2018; Pluralsight 2018). The functioning of modern organisation within global economy requires the use of management methods and development strategies that are adequate to the new management conditions in the stage of digital transformation.

Put shortly, numerous solutions and tools are being implemented in organisations. Especially, if they function in global scale. This article presents an example of digitisation of processes in Exide Technologies S.A. It should be noted that currently, most businesses, including SME’s and large businesses operating locally, regionally or internationally, support their processes with IT solutions.

Although the entire process is now commonly managed with electronic tools, there is still potential, or room, for further digitisation at the level of sub-processes or even particular activities. This also applies to entities that are leaders in their respective sectors (in global view). The analysed improvement is an example of this sort of approach—namely, the sub-process of preparation of goods for shipment (a part of the process of warehousing in the organisation’s Distribution Warehouse).

The solution’s originality and added value results from showing the identified organisational problems, the implementation of the solution and its effects in preparing shipments to around 20 European states, within the context of the global entity’s experience and know-how. The article aims to evaluate the effectiveness of digitisation within the sub-process of preparing goods for shipment from the distribution warehouse.

1.1 Methodology The article’s research purpose is the analysis of the effects of digitisation of the subprocess of preparing goods for shipment in the distribution warehouse (including picking, labelling, quantity and quality control, packaging and loading). The applied study methods included a case study and a documentation method.

The case study, or analysis and description of a single, most usually real case, that allows drawing conclusions on the causes and results of its course and, in a broader sense, a given business model, market specifics, technical, cultural and social conditions, etc. This means drawing conclusions on the basis of a single case. It is a study method consisting in a comprehensive description of a certain group or a unit, approached without any initial hypotheses.

The subject of exploration is individual in nature. The case study’s most important element, looking from the perspective of The Possibilities of Digitizing the Preparation Process … 95 credibility, is the quality of its substantial content. The quality is manifested, among else, by the accuracy of the raised problems, formulated diagnoses and the adequacy of solutions proposed for a given situation (Langley 1999).

The documentation method consists in the use of factual information for examination purposes, collected, in advance, for economic practice purposes and recorded in relevant documents. The improvement project was designed, implemented and evaluated in 2019 (it took six months). The examined entity is Exide Technologies S.A.—Distribution Warehouse in Swarz˛edz (Wielkopolska province, Poland).

It was exploratory case study data collection method accompanied by additional data collection method such as interviews, tests etc. Advantages of case study method included data collection and analysis within the context of phenomenon, integration of qualitative and quantitative data in data analysis. Due to this approach it was possible to capture complexities of real-life situations so that the phenomenon was studied in greater levels of depth.

Case studies involved both qualitative and quantitive research methods. On one hand things were measurable and were expressed in numbers, on the other survey questions were in most cases closed-ended and created in accordance with the research goals, thus making the answers easily transformable into numbers. Used methods to collecting data: direct observation, archival records and personal interviews. The research was conducted by project team. The improvement project is the outcome of the research.

Based on the research we discovered different possibilities how to optimise the operations, how to reduce time to pick orders, but also how to eliminate activities which does not add any value. Exide Technologies is an American multinational lead-acid batteries manufacturing company. It manufactures automotive batteries and industrial batteries. Exide’s predecessor corporation was the Electric Storage Battery Company, founded by Gibbs (in 1888 year).

Exide produces batteries and accessories for the Transportation markets with applications in the original-equipment and aftermarket channels for Auto/Truck/SUV, Heavy Duty, Lawn and Garden, Marine/RV, Golfcarts and Powersport, using Absorbed Glass Mat (AGM), Flooded, Enhanced Flooded Battery and Gel (VRLA) technologies. Exide also markets lithium-ion batteries for motorbikes in Europe (Exide 2020a).

Exide has production plants in 89 countries and is one of the largest producers of automotive batteries in the world (Exide 2020b). In Poland, Exide supplies batteries as the so-called first equipment to manufacturers such as: FCA Poland, VW Poznań, CNH in Płock, MAN in Niepołomice and Same Deutz-Fahr near Lublin.

The Poznań-made batteries are also exported and used in the newest models of cars manufactured: by Jaguar and Land Rover in England and Slovakia (Nitra), TPCA in Kolin (Czechia), VW in Bratislava, Škoda (plant in Mlada Boleslav and Kvasiny), Volvo Cars in Belgium and Sweden, Audi (Ingolstad, Germany). Additionally, Exide makes batteries for Scania, MAN and Volvo Trucks, all made in Europe. The company’s aftermarket brands are Centra and Exide.

The Poznań-based producer’s most important buyers are from Western Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (Ukraine, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Armenia) (Exide 2020b). 96 Ł. Brzeziński and M. K. Wyrwicka 1.2 Results The analysed improvement project covered the process of preparation of goods for shipment in the distribution warehouse.

It should be noted that, prior to digitization, there were multiple problems related, among else, to the use of various pallet labels, the circulation of printed documentation, determining responsibility for inconsistencies (for goods for which clients filed complaints).

The result of the described change was the introduction of scanners in the picking process, standardization of the supplementation and picking of batteries, creation of a set of KPI’s and monitoring of pallet movements of load units within the warehouse (Table 1). The analysed improvement project contributed to improved parameters of the evaluation of the sub-process of preparation of goods for shipment in the organization’s distribution warehouse.

Most importantly, a positive change was noted with regard to the number of quantitative errors (decrease from 5.8 to 3.2%), generic errors (decrease from 3.8 to 2.1%) or the preparation of incorrect pallets (reduction to 0%). Digitization also allowed to reduce the number of employees involved in the process (from 54 to 49). Additionally, the savings for 12 months were EUR 90,000 (the cost of implementation was around EUR 35,000) (Table 2).

Referring to the analyzes related to the use of digitization in the broadly understood logistics processes, enterprises use the potential of digital technologies as a source of value and transform supply chains in various ways and in various ways. At the same time, it is pointed out that the implementation of digital technologies requires strategic changes in both the business model and the operational model of the company (Bock et al. 2017).

The main challenge for the development of applications of these technologies are threats in global cyberspace, which significantly increase the negative risk regarding data security or transmitted information (Boyes 2016).

Barriers to the implementation of digital technologies also include: a lack of sufficient knowledge about the nature and importance of digitization, an incorrect assessment of its potential, a lack of capital for investments in technologies and a lack of confidence preventing the exchange of information (Sherman and Chauhan 2016).

It is indicated that currently 76% of enterprises use social media, in addition 63% of entrepreneurs say that analytical tools allow them to gain a competitive advantage. As many as 92% of entrepreneurs are satisfied with the services used in the cloud and plan to increase their use, and 54% of mobile phones are smartphones (Słowik 2015).

The results of a global survey conducted by Ernst & Young indicate that managers in the area of information and communication technologies (ITC) currently spend over 25% of the budget on innovation in the field of modern technologies such as social media, mobile technologies, advanced data analytics and cloud computing (Ernst and Young 2015). These technologies contribute to improving the quality of operations and better meeting customer expectations.

The Possibilities of Digitizing the Preparation Process … 97 Table 1 Comparison of work organization before and after the change Work organization before the change Work organization after the change There were different pallet labels used in the warehouse Workers prepared batteries using only paper documents Some information on pallet labels were missing e.g.

formation codes The planning of operations in the warehouse was based on paper documents/Excel files The correctness of labelling/finishing of batteries was controlled only visually (without any support from the WMS system) Voltage control results were registered on paper The productivity report was prepared in an Excel file The information on the current status of the productivity of the finishing line was not displayed on the screen/seen by the workers The complaints (regardless of the reason) were not easy to investigate for the root cause There were difficulties in implementing an action plan to reduce the number of mistakes Not enough information on the pallet labels Unclear information on who prepared the pallet (illegible signatures) Waste of time due to unnecessary travel within the warehouse (incorrect voltage in the racks, labels not available) Some ready pallets stored in incorrect places Searching for the ready pallets in the warehouse due to missing information in the documents Difficulties in assessment of the workload of a shift Difficulties in assessment and execution of productivity (poor planning based on paper documents, Excel files) Difficulties in executing correct planning and transfer of information at the turn of the shift Different responsibilities of employees Implementation of scanners for picking Standardization of replenishment and battery picking processes Standardization of the process of picking from the storage Standardization of the label preparation process Crating sets of KPI’s for monitoring productivity Creating an application for displaying results Different roles and tasks assigned to employees in the application Tracking and tracing movement in the warehouse Tracking and tracing of preparation of customers’ orders Monitoring of tasks assigned to particular users 2 Conclusions The role and importance of digitisation in business management and improving the functioning of supply chains is a topic widely discussed in the literature.

The originality of the article is primarily due to the indication of a practical example of improvement in one of the leading battery manufacturers—Exide Technologies.

98 Ł. Brzeziński and M. K. Wyrwicka Table 2 Evaluation of digitization of the sub-process of preparation of goods for shipment KPI’s Before the change After implementation of scanners Average number of batteries picked by a picker 428 467 Average number of batteries labelled per finishing line 890 997 % of complaints (errors in qty) 0.058 0.032 % of complaints (errors in type) 0.038 0.021 % of complaints (errors in loading wrong pallet) 0.0001 0 No.

of mistakes when preparing reports 12 3 Reduction in paper consumption 60 55 No. of employees needed for the process 54 49 Savings in EUR (12 months) 90,000 Money spent (in EUR) on the project 35,000 ROI 1.57 The distribution warehouse serves customers from over 20 European countries. The indicated picking solutions have contributed to shortening the time of preparation of goods for shipment, reducing the number of process errors and reducing the costs.

A conclusion can be made, on the basis of the conducted analyses, that the digitisation of processes leads to a multi-dimensional transformation of the nature of the entire supply chain that is subject to virtual imaging through the continued collecting, processing and monitoring of the data from all cells.

Economic changes within the process of digital transformation and the evolution of business relations mean that companies wanting to compete effectively on global markets, thanks to the organization of supply chains, must give crucial importance to their flexibility and its ability to implement innovative business models along with the reorganization of processes.

This will ultimately allow for achieving higher levels of digital maturity, which will translate into greater efficiency in the functioning of supply chains during the period of digital transformation—significant changes are already visible in the reconfiguration of logistics processes and business communication. Referring to the benefits of research, it is worth noting that digitization can contribute to improving the functioning of the organization.

This is of significant importance especially at the operational level, where it is possible to study in detail the functioning of individual work stations. Which is also to some extent related to the improvement of the organizational structure from the bottom, as IT tools are usually implemented at the strategic level.

However, when it comes to certain limitations of research analyzes, they are primarily associated with the study of a single The Possibilities of Digitizing the Preparation Process … 99 organization, which also means that the results of similar activities in other enterprises can generate completely different results.

In the aspect of future research, the authors will focus on increasing the research sample of business entities to obtain a broader perspective of potential benefits and threats from the digitization of logistics processes. It should be noted that even global enterprises have a large potential to introduce improvements with the application of digital tools within sub-processes and operations (parts of the warehousing process in this example).

The described solution contributed to improvements both in quality (reduction of errors) and in costs— reduction of time needed to prepare the goods for shipment or the involvement of employees. In the view of global crisis situations (COVID-19 pandemics), this may play a big role for the organisation’s survival. Acknowledgments Poznan University of Technology 11/142/SBAD/1005. References Atzori L, Iera A, Morabito G (2010) The Internet of things: a survey.

Comput Netw 54 Ballou RH (2007) The evolution and future of logistics and supply chain management. Europ Bus Rev 19(4):332–348 Barton R, Thomas A (2009) Implementation of intelligent systems, enabling integration of SMEs to high-value supply chain networks. Eng Appl Artif Intell 22 Bock R, Iansiti M, Lakhani KR (2017) What the companies on the right side of the digital business divide have in common. Harv Bus Rev 31 January 2017 Boyes H (2016) Cybersecurity and cyber-resilient supply chains.

Technol Innov Manag Rev, April 2016 Bughin J, Livingstone J, Marwaha S (2011) Seizing the potential of big data. McKinsey Quart 4 Carmichael F, Palacios-Marques D, Gil-Pechuan I (2011) How to create information management capabilities through web 2.0. Serv Indus J 31 Chopra S, Meindl P (2007) Supply chain management. strategy, planning & operation. In: Boersch C, Elschen R (eds) Das Summa Summarum des Management. Gabler Cohen B, Kietzmann J (2014) Ride on!

Mobility business models for the sharing economy. Organ Environ 27(3):279–296 Columbus L (2015) 10 ways mobility is revolutionizing manufacturing. Forbes 4 Corcoran P, Datta SK (2016) Mobile-edge computing and the internet of things for consumers: extending cloud computing and services to the edge of the network. IEEE Consum Electr Mag 5(5):73 Coyle JJ, Bardi EJ, Langley CJ (2010) Zarz˛adzanie logistyczne. Polskie Wydawnictwo, Warszawa Detlor B (2010) Information management.

Int J Inform Manag 30 Dörner K, Edelman D (2015) What ‘digital’ really means [2018-02-15]. McKinsey Digital. https:// www.mckinsey.com/industries/high-tech/our-insights/what-digital-really-means.Ekonomiczne Ernst & Young (2015) SMAC 3.0: digital is here. Enterprise IT trends and investments 2015 [202005-05]. https://pingpdf.com/pdf-smac-30-digital-is-here-ey.html Exide (2020a). https://www.exide.com/en/about-us Exide (2020b).

https://www.akumulator.pl/artykuly/exide-konczy-130-lat-w-poznaniu-obecnyjest-od-ponad-20-lat/ Fourth Industrial Revolution. World Economic Forum, Cologny/Geneva 100 Ł. Brzeziński and M. K. Wyrwicka Johnson MW, Christensen CM, Kagermann H (2008) Reinventing your business model. Harv Buss Rev 12 Kayikci Y (2018) Sustainability impact of digitalization in logistics. Procedia Manuf 21:782–789 Langley A (1999) Strategies for theorizing from process data.

Acad Manag Rev 4 Manyika J, Chui M, Bughin J, Dobbs R, Bisson P, Marrs A (2013) Disruptive technologies: advances that will transform life, business, and the global economy. Raport McKinsey Global Institute. McKinsey & Company Neubauer NM (2011) Business models in the area of logistics: in search of hidden champions, their business principles and common industry misperceptions. Gabler Verlag.

Wiesbaden: Springer Science & Business Media Paprocki W (2016) Koncepcja Przemysł 4.0 i jej zastosowanie w warunkach gospodarki cyfrowej. W: J. Gajewski, W. Paprocki, J. Pieriegud (red.). Cyfryzacja gospodarki i społeczeństwa. Szanse i wyzwania dla sektorów infrastrukturalnych (s. 39–57). Gdańsk: Instytut Badań nad Gospodark˛a Rynkow˛a; Gdańska Akademia Bankowa Pluralsight. (2018). Technology in 2025: Prepare for the fourth industrial revolution [2018-03-28].

Pluralsigh, https://www.pluralsight.com/blog/career/tech-in-2025. Rappa MA (2004) The utility business model and the future of computing services. IBM Syst J 43(1):32–42 Schwab K (2016) The fourth industrial revolution. World Economic Forum, Cologny/Geneva Sherman R, Chauhan V (2016) Just my (re-)imagination. Supply Chain Manag Rev, March/April Słowik J (2015) Nadaj SMAC swojemu biznesowi. Nowoczesne Zarz˛adzanie 1:48–49 Still (2018) Przemysł 4.0 – przyszłość czy mrzonka? [2018-04-04]. Still Polska.

https://www.still. pl/28657.0.0.html Szukalski SM, Wodnicka M (2016) Outsourcing. Metodyka przygotowywania procesów i ocena efektywności. Difin, Warszawa Uton J (2017) Setting sights on the smart supply chain. Pharmaceutical Executive—Oper Manag 3 Wodnicka M (2019) Technologie blockchain przyszłości˛a logistyki. Zeszyty Naukowe Małopolskiej Wyższej Szkoły Ekonomicznej W Tarnowie, t. 41(1):43–53 Wood R (2010) Creating the smart supply chain.

MHD Supply Chain Solut 7–8 World Economic Forum (2016a) The future of jobs: employment, skills and workforce strategy for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, Cologny/Geneva World Economic Forum (2016b) Top 10 emerging technologies of 2016. World Economic Forum, Cologny/Geneva Wu L, Yue X, Jin A, Yen DC (2016) Smart supply chain management: a review and implications for future research.

Int J Logist Manag 27 Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design for Industry 4.0 Digital Innovation Hubs Adam Olszewski and Pawel Pawlewski Abstract This chapter is addressing the creation of added value by means of concurrent engineering in the early stages of IT systems design for Industry 4.0 enterprises in the context of Digital Innovation Hubs.

The recent phenomenon of Digital Innovation Hubs poses new opportunities and threats in introducing advanced collaborative IT services co-developed by a number of complementary subjects, such as ISVs, infrastructure providers, consulting firms, research entities and others. Unlike other business networks or chambers of commerce, Digital Innovation Hubs place research entities at the core of innovation ecosystems.

Such approach may result in transversal involvement of external stakeholders in research and development IT projects. While consequent opportunities are many, so are the threats and uncertainties. This article analyses related pros and cons based on research results published thus far and selected ongoing use cases. Furthermore, this article proposes new investment risk factors resulting from broadening the pool of IT system design stakeholders.

Keywords Industry 4.0 · Concurrent engineering · Digital innovation hub 1 Introduction The Information System (IS) industry has to provide added value, or value proposition, desired by their customers in order to spur profits. This article is addressing the creation of added value by means of external stakeholder engagement and concurrent engineering in the early stages of IT systems design for 4.0 (Industry/Logistics) enterprises in the context of Digital Innovation Hubs.

The recent phenomenon of Digital Innovation Hubs poses new opportunities and threats in introducing advanced A. Olszewski (B) IBCh PAS-Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center(PSNC), Poznan, Poland e-mail: adol@man.poznan.pl P. Pawlewski Faculty of Engineering Management, Poznan University of Technology, J. Rychlewskiego 2, 60-965 Poznań, Poland e-mail: pawel.pawlewski@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_7 101 102 A. Olszewski and P. Pawlewski collaborative IT services co-developed by a number of complementary subjects, such as ISVs, infrastructure providers, consulting firms, research entities and others.

Unlike other business networks or chambers of commerce, Digital Innovation Hubs place research entities at the core of innovation ecosystems. Such approach may result in transversal involvement of external stakeholders in research and development IT projects. While consequent opportunities are many, so are the threats and uncertainties. This article analyses related pros and cons based on research results published thus far and selected ongoing use cases.

Furthermore, this article proposes new investment risk factors resulting from broadening the pool of IT system design stakeholders.

The goal of this chapter is to verify by means of qualitative comparison analysis if there is a need to conduct action research in the field of value-driven/concurrent engineering, which would enable comparing and balancing the benefits and risks resulting from an early inclusion of external entities (members of I4.0 manufacturing companies’ ecosystems) in the early stages of information system (IS) design.

While the vast majority of research focuses on applied IT system design done by corporates with clear predefined targets, this article analyses the tools and approaches research organizations take at the early stages, up to Technology Readiness Level 3 (TRL3), of technology integration and information system development. Unlike corporates, whose main objectives are to grow profits and cut costs, research organizations focus on expanding the boundaries of knowledge.

On this account the perspective of research entities on concurrent engineering may differ significantly from the corporate or industrial perspectives and analysing this phenomenon shall bring to light new, unobvious values, underrated in corporate-driven ecosystems. Also, this same analysis may initiate taking a broader perspective on the value creation issue— the one of R&D investment risk mitigating tools, potentially useful for both corporate and academic research environments.

The highlights of the chapter are: – analysis of information system development perceived added values shared by academic and business ecosystems, – comparison of closed and open innovation paradigms – proposition of new unobvious R&D investment risk factors – subjective prioritization of R&D investment risk factors – analysis of investment risk management tools.

The main contribution is the development of a collaborative DIH based service development approach which enables an intentional management of uncertainty as a critical R&D investment risk factor. The chapter is organized as follows: first, in Sect. 2 academic vs industrial values and indicators are contrasted, thence presenting the different approaches to R&D and IS design.

Section 3 defines the problem—what is the unobvious added value of collaborative IS/service design and how can the key factors be managed in industrial settings. The following Sect.

4 proposes a DIH based approach to managing IS design uncertainty by providing a subjective ranking of unobvious values shared by Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design … 103 industry and academia, listing their success factors and assessing the impact of the digital innovation hubs approach on these factors. Conclusions of the final Sect. 5 are followed by further research recommendations.

2 Literature Background Literature hardly addresses the fairly new phenomenon of Digital Innovation Hubs in view of value-driven Information System (IS) design. Although it has not yet been thoroughly examined, a number of related studies have been published, mainly addressing the corporate perspective on IS design in closed environments, which can serve as a reference platform for our analysis.

On the one hand, closed IS design environments have been thoroughly studied— by focusing on R&D investment risk, Bahli and Rivard (2005) list the factors having biggest impact on the efficiency and results of outsourced IS design. On the other hand, design environments following the open innovation paradigm focus on the methods rather than efficiency and economic results.

Some analyse the very concepts of design, showing how new, collaborative methods can be co-created either by in-house employees or by involving external professionals. For this purpose novel event formulas are tested, such as ideation contests or codesign workshops. IS design, being one of many areas in such studies, appears interchangeably with service design.

Consequently, these analyses and the underlying recommendations referring to teambuilding, market exploration or process management refer to codesign as the primary subject, while IS design plays the role of a reference point rather than the primary subject. Although references to IS design across codesign studies are rather mild, selected conclusions can be quite relevant and trend sensitive.

Like in any codesign endeavour, also in IS design, the general migration from granting a sole expert individual the full responsibility for design outcomes to enabling customers or users join IS design teams and play the roles of experts of their experiences (Visser et al. 2005). The process of involving external stakeholders in service design has been divided into stages.

Its application from stages from TRL1 to TRL3 as ideation has been analysed, querying whether or not such approach can benefit an organization’s innovation outcomes. From the process perspective two approaches to research have been proposed (Edvardsson et al.

2005), as a “category of market offerings” or a “perspective on value creation.” Little attention has been paid however, to economic benefits of the novel process, resulting in limited usability of these studies in realworld decision-making, including added value or investment risk measurements. The existing research is based on a service centred approach, assuming a logic that is always uniquely and phenomenologically determined by the beneficiary (Vargo and Lusch 2016, p. 8).

In terms of types of stakeholder involved, the present research is based on B2B relations, rather than science-to-business or business-to-customer, which results in the neglecting of the two latter types. Moreover, the analysed cases most often focus on local, near proximity entities, leaving the broader context of international markets 104 A. Olszewski and P. Pawlewski aside (Gemser and Perks 2015).

Whereas, the ability to consciously involve specific extreme customers or partners who have particular need ahead of market with highly estimated expectations (von Hippel 1986) can be very beneficial for IS design and innovation (Mahr et al. 2014). One of repeated hypotheses across literature, is that by involving customers a company can become more resilient to investment risk by avoiding the problem of user needs being sticky, difficult to transfer, and articulate (von Hippel 2001; Witell et al.

2011). It is worth mentioning that already the traditional design studies, unlike IS approaches, implied that participatory approach required the “exchange between people who experience products, interfaces, systems and spaces and people who design for experiencing” (Sanders et al. 1999). The lack of proper participatory IS design tools has also been covered from public services perspective, such as medical software for patients and caregivers.

While it is evident that IS shall support and not hinder the experiences of caregivers and patients, little or no tools actually enable gathering requirements or insights from these target groups. The consequent misalignment of medical software results in highly qualified staff spending more of their time with the computer screen rather than with the patient.

In this case the key factor or added value resulting from involving patients and users in the IS design would be the shortening of time doctors, physicians and other caregivers must spent at their computers. Based on specific medical workflows, involving all key stakeholders, concrete steps and related insights are introduced, playing the role of a showcase of tools for healthcare innovation projects (Vollmer 2019).

Similarly to industrial contexts, the medical software fails to take a holistic approach to the addressed process, to embrace the off-screen experiences and finally to deliver tools that solve existing real-life problems without causing new ones. The present studies of specific use cases in medical area may bridge the conceptual gap between the industrial and academic contexts.

Some of these cases have been introduced as role models for novel methodologies, such as EVOKE (Early Value Oriented design exploration with Knowledge maturity), meant to facilitate the selection of the newly appearing IS design possibilities with a focus on added value related information. Engineers’ tendency to avoid redesign during development, especially at IS component level, is yet another added value hindrance addressed in recent studies.

All too often IS developers go back to initial setting of value, agreed for the IS with the product owner early in the project and before external, non-technical stakeholders were even introduced to the planning. This phenomenon may give grounds to either earlier involvement of the user or to extending the IS concept definition phase. Either way, study shows that selection of the right moment when users’ needs are introduced might be critical for IS development.

Similarly, the knowledge […] where user needs originate and mature becomes critical to understand which sub-system performances have to be sacrificed to optimize the overall system behaviour. This makes systems engineers to go back and refer to the original construct of ‘value’ to orient their early stage design decisions (Monceaux and Kossmann 2012). Both aspects are of critical impact on investment risk certainty factor.

However, when moving from the macro level to the micro, this ‘value’ notion becomes blurrier, and contextual understanding gets lost when requirements are Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design … 105 communicated down the supply network (Monceaux et al. 2014). There, the actual struggle of component oriented engineers takes place, depriving the IS of the userdriven added value by following the original, presumably unnegotiable, IS specifications.

Although more resilient to additional costs and multiplying iterations, such conservative approach can hardly maximize the desired added value (Isaksson et al. 2013).

The established IS supply processes, although effective in coordinating a definite pool of tasks and resources towards the predefined objective, cannot handle the early stages of innovative IS development, which requires continuous sharing of knowledge and negotiations embracing a range of interdisciplinary skills, experiences and tools originating at different, often distanced, entities.

Narrowing down targets to local perspectives causes design teams to fail creating solutions configured in the most valuable way. Empirical observations show that when system-level requirements are not available or not mature enough, engineers dealing with the development of long lead-time sub-systems tend to target local optima, rather than opening up the design space (Bertoni et al. 2018). These ‘local optima’ seldom embody the best possible result for the overall system.

Most likely they hinder the possibility of identifying solutions that would work even better and that maximize value (Collopy and Hollingsworth 2011). Some authors underline the importance and poor results of gathering specific requirements for IS engineering. On the one hand, well defined requirements for an IS are known to be prerequisite to avoid customer disappointment.

On the other hand, all too often the process of defining IS requirements is neglected, delayed or distributed across engineering teams. Many claim that failure to involve stakeholders or clients at this stage leads directly to uncontrolled cost increase.

Conversely, to improve clarity, awareness and understanding of what should be included in a system design, and hence to minimize development time and later rework, iteration and negotiation with customers and stakeholders must be established since the earliest design phases (Jiao and Chen 2006; Withanage et al. 2010).

Nonetheless, all too often the relation with customers is not managed in an intentional manner nor carried out consistently, resulting in overlapping or missing requirements for specific IS features, modules, layers, documentation. Research in established software engineering methods shows that, requirements elicitation is far from being a linear, monolithic process; rather, it follows a more concurrent process (Prasad 1999).

Consequently, unlike the open innovation paradigm involving external real-life stakeholders, the established research focuses on empowering individual engineers like they are owners of the processes addressed by the systems they develop. It is claimed a significant part of the concurrent design method, that the individual engineer, not an external stakeholder, customer, nor future user, is given much more say in the overall design process due to the collaborative nature of concurrent engineering.

Giving the engineer ownership is claimed to improve the productivity of the employee and quality of the product, based on the assumption that people who are given a sense of gratification and ownership over their work tend to work harder and design a more robust product, as opposed to an employee that is assigned a task with little say in the general process (Kusiak 1992).

106 A. Olszewski and P. Pawlewski 3 Research Problem The key problem analysed in this article is whether or not there are any unobvious values behind recent academic paradigms, such as the open innovation paradigm, and its implementations, such as digital innovation hubs, that could bring new value or increase the existing values for industrial R&D clients in the development of IT systems.

From a business theory perspective, customer value refers to customers’ perceptions of what they receive, in return for what they sacrifice (Zeithaml 1988). There are two aspects to customer value: desired value and perceived value. In order to assess value from industry 4.0 perspective one needs to dig deeper the notions of customer and value. This article focuses on the latter with minor references to the former.

Being an organization rather than individual, a manufacturing plant may employ thousands of professionals, all potentially having different perspectives on the value of delivered IT solutions. Additionally, partners of the manufacturing plant, such as service providers, hardware maintenance firms, external consultants and last but not least the logistics all assess the functionalities and features of the plant’s IT layer from another angle.

On this account, before starting a study, it takes to define and classify the notions of the key user, value, IT system. In MIDIH project a collaborative approach to IT service development is proposed, by forming a network of digital innovation hubs, i.e. collaborative networks of research and business entities with complementary offerings. This approach calls for new value measurement tools and may discover novel values, absent in closed single provider settings.

The collaborative MIDIH approach also redefines key notions, including values and their indicators from shared, intersubjective perspectives. – Better use of internal transport, – Better organization of work in the warehouse, – Less consumption of internal transport by reducing storage space, Less electricity consumption in forklift trucks—by eliminating unnecessary movements on handling.

4 Problem Solution and Methodology For sake of this article we propose an alignment of notions used within two analysed use cases—projects, MIDIH—Manufacturing Industry Digital Innovation Hubs and SymbIoTe—Symbiosis of Smart Objects across IoT Environment.

While the latter project has been concluded and provides a full overview of IT value creation, the former MIDIH is in progress while writing this article, which enables us to continue observations and studies proposed in the final remarks of this article. Both projects focus on developing advanced IT tools that may enable new or more efficient processes within industrial environments.

Moreover, both projects involve numerous R&D organizations, along with their perspectives and goals and a number Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design … 107 of industrial partners, playing roles of pilot adopters of the developed IT tools. Therefore, by analysing these cases, we add a real-life layer to our otherwise theoretical considerations.

MIDIH project proposes a novel approach to the creation of technology based value proposition, influencing the investment risk in R&D. By experimenting with IS component development in DIH environments, MIDIH redefines the provider and the value and consequently proposes new tools for creating the value proposition.

Unlike in Osterwalder’s business model canvass, normally applied to a single product provided by a single vendor, MIDIH takes a DIH based collaborative provider approach, where the value proposition does not exist unless complementary resources are combined and integrated in a collaborative manner. Such multiple vendor value requires a more advanced consideration of ecosystem relations and value flows in order to properly analyse, plan and manage the value network across multiple stakeholders.

For this purpose MIDIH redesigns the Osterwalder’s canvass, combines it with the value network analysis tool and complements with the project’s new DIH service portfolio analysis tool, covering as many as 34 service development factors embracing the actual collaborative service aspects in more detail than the classical single provider tools do.

In industrial IT research the customer is the business entity who orders IT R&D or development jobs and expects these jobs to be performed as planned, which in case of research is not always the case. From industrial client perspective, the overall value of IT R&D boils down to ensuring a positive balance between costs and benefits which is determined by the notion of IT R&D investment risk.

Insights from transaction costs theory suggest that there exist three major sources of risk factors for IT outsourcing: the transaction, the client and the supplier (Bahli and Rivard 2005) divide the three risk sources into seven risk factors—Table 1. These are the factors that industrial ecosystems are familiar with and hence these factors are intentionally managed by businesses.

However, apart from those well-known key factors, there may be other factors and related values, largely ignored by the industrial environments, yet having significant impact on the overall IS design risk. The hypothesis we are analysing here is that Table 1 Risk factors in IT outsourcing operation.

(Source own study) Source of risk Risk factors Transaction Asset specificity Small number of suppliers Uncertainty Relatedness Measurement problems Client Expertise with the IT operation Supplier Expertise with the IT operation Expertise with outsourcing Expertise with outsourcing 108 A. Olszewski and P. Pawlewski by intentionally managing these new, unobvious risk factors, industry could lower their investment risks and consequently boost their innovation and research activity (Table 2).

MIDIH project has made a new source of risk, ecosystem, evident and covering an array of risk factors. However in this article we focus only on a single, high impact factor—uncertainty—potentially including values going beyond the obvious business criteria.

In the context of IT outsourcing, uncertainty may be present because […] the transacting parties have incomplete or imperfect information, or because there are numerous unimaginable possibilities, which may arise during the course of the transaction. This means that, in the face of uncertainty, contracts are unavoidably incomplete, and may require renegotiation and frequent adjustments when unexpected contingencies occur.

This renegotiation adds to ex ante costs and postpones the realization of outsourcing’s perspective value. Ultimately, the resolution of ex ante uncertainty must wait ex post reality (Pilling et al. 1994). Table 2 Risk factors largely ignored by the industrial environments.

(Source own study) Source of risk Risk factors Related added values from DIH approach Transaction Asset specificity Improved understanding Low Small number of suppliers Collaborative supply options Mid Uncertainty Early and thorough validation of assumed desired features High Relatedness Multiple interdependence Low Client Supplier Ecosystem Level of impact on risk Measurement problems Broad access to academic measurement tools Low Expertise with the IT operation Extended area-specific pool of IT expertise Mid Expertise with outsourcing Improved access to shared services and consultancy firms Low Expertise with the IT operation Extended area-specific pool of IT expertise Mid Expertise with outsourcing Improved access to shared services and consultancy firms Low IPR management Alternative IPR options High Technology lifecycle management Transparent distribution High of responsibilities and costs Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design … 109 Fig.

1 View of of living laboratory—SymbIoTe project The data for this part of analysis have been gathered in a living laboratory mode concentrating at three workshops, carried out every six months within SymbIoTe project—Fig. 1. During workshops the same value-related questions were asked to check the correctness and level of certainty about values expected by industrial partners.

Initially, R&D partners, in this case suppliers of IS, listed the values they had assumed key for their clients—industrial partners. Later, those same categories of values were collected from industrial partners. Finally, after the initial failed validation process, values listed by both sources were once more gathered, combined and completed.

The study reveals that prior to the involvement of industrial partners the levels of certainty about assumed values were high, even though very generic and in some cases incorrect. Only after listing values by industrial partners the values assumed by R&D could have been validated. The revealed discrepancy between values assumed by suppliers and expected by clients had an impact on the definition and execution of the developed technology components and further IS functionalities.

For instance, interoperability of sensor data across modules and levels was one of the core system assumptions. However, it was only after DIH workshops that camera entered the subject matter pool of sensors as video recordings were indicated by consumers the type of data needed in such systems, which had never been considered before.

Without repeatedly guiding both suppliers and clients through the IS usage scenarios, the resulting IS prototype would have been construed accordingly with the suppliers’ initial assumptions. Consequently, the resulting proof of concept IS tools would not have met the expectations of clients to the level it finally did. In MIDIH project the mutual sharing of resources (data and infrastructures) and complementing competences is observed to bring the critical added value for industrial partners.

The usage of FIWARE architecture and its Arrowhead components, built by a numerous R&D, in combination with middleware and hardware elements 110 A. Olszewski and P. Pawlewski coming from MIDIH partners gave birth to a robotic arm demonstrator, operating in a flat structure in factories giving superior managerial and analytical qualities surpassing those of the pyramid PLC based structure.

Another interesting result is the logistical monitoring systems, developed by FIAT Research Centre in collaboration with Cefriel and Engineering. Here, CPS/IoT Technologies have been adopted, and, leveraging on MIDIH Open Platform and on the methodologies that have been developed within the project, it has been possible to enable the optimization both of Inbound Logistics Processes (Smart Supply Chain scenario) and Industrial Processes (Smart Factory scenario) in FCA.

Consequently, a scenario has been developed where international logistics can monitor a container condition live and from historical data, indicating cases of free fall, side falling and crossing parameters such as humidity or temperature. Likewise in SymbIoTe, this and other MIDIH project industrial solutions would have missed critical requirements had it not been for the collaborative open approach at early development stages, involving multiple stakeholders on both provider and customer sides.

5 Conclusions and Further Works Values sought for by academics pushing state-of-the-art resulting from the open innovation paradigm, i.e. opening up for external ideas and allowing internal ideas outside or early involvement of industrial partners in IT R&D, may add substantially to the values desired by industrial clients, in it to lowering R&D investment risk, by raising transactional certainty and enabling new unobvious industrially desired benefits.

At present, the industrial benefits grow unintentionally in science-to-business consortia and their economic potential lingers largely undisclosed. It takes further research to verify if intentional open innovation could bring substantial increase of the desired value for industry and consequently raise the uptake of R&D projects results.

An array of interdisciplinary research would be needed, involving disciplines such as IT engineering, design and economy, to identify and propose respective IS design risk management tools. The issue analysed in this article merely touches the surface of a broader problem of added value generation and maximization across the whole innovation development up to TRL9 and lifecycle.

An extended research is needed to assess more collaborative approaches and tools and to analyse their specific implementations. Acknowledgements The work was carried out as part of the Project no. 767498 “Manufacturing Industry Digital Innvation Hubs”, financed by European Union Framework Programme for Research and Innovation Horizon 2020.

Stakeholder Involvement Added Value Indicators in IT Systems Design … 111 References Bahli B, Rivard S (2005) Validating measures of information technology outsourcing risk factors. Omega 33(2):175–187 Bertoni M, Bertoni A, Isaksson O (2018) EVOKE: a value-driven concept selection method for early system design. J Syst Sci Syst Eng 27:46–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11518-016-5324-2 Collopy PD, Hollingsworth PM (2011) Value-driven design.

J Aircraft 48(3):749–759 Edvardsson B, Gustafsson A, Roos I (2005) Service portraits in service research: a critical review. Int J Serv Ind Manag 16(1):107–121 Gemser G, Perks H (2015) Co-Creation with Customers: an Evolving Innovation Research Field. J Prod Innov Manag 32(5):660–665 Isaksson O, Kossmann M, Bertoni M, Eres H, Monceaux A, Bertoni A, Wiseall S, Zhang X (2013). Value-driven design: a methodology to link expectations to technical requirements in the extended enterprise.

In: Proceedings of the 23rd INCOSE international symposium, 23 (1): 803–819, Philadelphia, PA Jiao J, Chen C-H (2006) Customer requirement management in product development: a review of research issues. Concur Eng Res Appl 14(3):173–185 Kusiak A (1992) Concurrent engineering: automation, tools, and techniques. Wiley-Interscience; 1 edn Mahr D, Lievens A, Blazevic V (2014) The value of customer co-created knowledge during the innovation process.

J Prod Innov Manag 31(3):599–615 Monceaux A, Kossmann M (2012) Towards a value-Driven design methodology enhancing traditional requirements management enterprise. Proceedings of the 22nd INCOSE symposium, 22 (1):910–925, Rome, Italy Monceaux A, Kossman M, Wiseall S, Bertoni M, Isaksson O, Eres MH, Bertoni A, Ndrianarilala R (2014) Overview of value driven design research: methods, applications and relevance for conceptual design.

Insight 17(4):37–39 Pilling B, Crosby L, Jackson D (1994) Relational bonds in industrial exchange: an experimental test of the transaction cost economic framework. J Bus Res 30(3):237–251 Prasad B (1999) Enabling principles of concurrency and simultaneity in concurrent engineering. Artif Intell Eng Des Anal Manuf 13(3):185–204 Sanders BE, Dandavate U (1999) Design for experiencing: new tools.

1st International Conference on Design and Emotion, Delft, the Netherlands Vargo L Stephen, Lusch RF (2016) Institutions and axioms: an extension and update of servicedominant logic. J Acad Mark Sci 44(1):5–23 Visser S Froukje, Stappers PJ, Van der Lugt R, Sanders EB (2005) Contextmapping: experiences from practice. CoDesign 1(2):119–149 Witell L, Kristensson P, Gustafsson A, Löfgren M (2011) Idea generation: customer co-creation versus traditional market research techniques.

J Serv Manag 22(2):140–159 Vollmer F (2019) 4D Wireframing as a tool for integrating digital with physical touchpoints for an elevated patient experience. In: Pfannstiel M, Rasche C (eds) Service design and service thinking in healthcare and hospital management. Springer, Cham von Hippel E (1986) Lead users: a source of novel product concepts. Manage Sci 32(7):791–805 von Hippel E (2001) User toolkits for innovation.

J Prod Innov Manag 18(4):247–257 Withanage C, Park T, Choi H-J (2010) A concept evaluation method for strategic product design with concurrent consideration of future customer requirements. Concur Eng Res Appl 18(4):275–289 Zeithaml VA (1988) Consumer perceptions of price, quality, and value: a means-end model and synthesis of evidence.

J Market 52(3):2–22 Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs in Terms of the Omnichannel Concept Roman Domański and Hubert Wojciechowski Abstract The new form of multi-channel sales—omnichannel—entails the need for companies to adapt to provide the best possible customer experience. Dedicated CRM systems are solutions that enterprises use to manage customer relationships.

They should evolve from classic solutions, currently existing, towards customer relationship management systems that meet the requirements of omnichannel—i.e. Omnichannel Customer Relationship Management (OCRM) systems. Due to the large number of solutions, only CRM systems dedicated to small and medium enterprises (SME) is studied in this chapter.

This chapter aims to develop best possible configuration of CRM system dedicated to omnichannel and, in the next step, to compare existing CRM systems for SME with the best possible one. State-of-the art solutions in modern forms of distribution suggest that there is a research gap in ranking of key factors for CRM systems that use the omnichannel approach.

The originality of this article is based on: undertaking a very niche topic—SME-dedicated CRM systems enabling the implementation of the omnichannel concept; a pioneering solution to the problem based on an innovative research tool—the Grey Incidence Analysis (GIA) method from the Grey System Theory (GST) family.

Keywords Omnichannel · Customer relationship management (CRM) systems · Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) · Grey incidence analysis (GIA) · Grey system theory (GST) R. Domański · H. Wojciechowski (B) Faculty of Engineering Management, Institute of Logistics, Division of Production Engineering and Logistics, Poznan University of Technology, ul.

Jacka Rychlewskiego 2, 60-965 Poznań, Poland e-mail: hubert.wojciechowski@put.poznan.pl R. Domański e-mail: roman.domanski@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_8 113 114 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski The chapter used the interdependence of analysis of qualitative and quantitative elements. In the theoretical part, a systematic literature review was used to analyze secondary sources listed in the Scopus database.

In the practical part, GIA method, in primary study, was used as a tool for comparing CRM systems. 1 Introduction A new form of distribution called omnichannel is defined as universal retail or a universal channel. It offers the possibility of making purchase/sale transactions by switching from one channel (e.g. conclusion of a contract through a call centre) to another (e.g.

collecting goods from parcel pick-up stations) at any stage of the transaction, including parallel operation in several channels at the same time (e.g. comparison of the price level in an online shop while visiting a brick-and-mortar shop). For customers, this solution means shopping comfort. For enterprises, this is a challenge related to shaping distribution logistics systems adequate to customers’ expectations. What can be of use hers is modern technology.

Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems are used to maintain good shopping experience. CRM systems support enterprises in implementing operational, analytical and contact (interactive) functions. Therefore, this category of software was selected as the object of the study in the article. However, due to the emergence of new forms of retail, the existing (classic) CRM systems should evolve towards omnichannel (modern) OCRM systems. This transformation is now taking place.

In each country, the dominant fraction (although numbers are different) is small and medium enterprises (SMEs)—e.g. in 2018 in Poland they made up 95% (LEs made up just 5%). They largely create the economic position of a given country. In this group of enterprises, the effects of changes (organizational and technological transformations) have the greatest potential to affect the economy of each country. That is why SMEs were chosen in the article as the research subject.

A promising executive concept of the postulates outlined above is the Grey System Theory (GST). Due to the rapid rate of changes in business and the long time it takes to obtain statistical data, conducting objective comprehensive research is very difficult to carry out and is also economically unviable. GST is an alternative. Using this theory, in the lean language terms, one can come to the same conclusions using less time and fewer resources. One of the GST tools is Grey Incidence Analysis (GIA).

It enables the study of interrelationships (degree of similarity) between systems. The idea of this article is based on formulating the functionality of an ideal OCRM system and then comparing it with the list of CRM systems available on the market for SMEs in order to assess the extent to which they meet the omnichannel retail requirements. That is why GIA was chosen in the article as a research implementation tool.

The article aims to develop the best possible configuration of the CRM system dedicated to omnichannel and then to compare the existing CRM systems for SMEs Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 115 with the best possible one.

The article consists of the following sections: literature search in the Scopus database—quantitative and qualitative analysis of articles; description of a four-stage original methodology of testing CRM systems dedicated to SMEs in the context of omnichannel; presentation of the sequence results of research on the omnichannel of CRM systems dedicated to SMEs using the GIA method, results analysis and final conclusions.

2 Literature Search in the Scopus Database 2.1 Quantity Analysis The only source of literature search is the Scopus database. This is only seemingly a research limitation. The authors’ previous numerous experiences allow to conclude that in the majority of cases the same list of publications is the result of a search in the Web of Science database. Hence, there is no need to duplicate literature search. Literature search in the Scopus database was conducted on 26 February 2020.

In each case, interesting phrases were sought in the following places: “article title, abstract, keywords”—identification of potential articles. Literature search starts with the recognition of interest in individual concepts. The evaluation criterion in this respect is the number of publications on a given topic— individually (Table 1). As part of the search, various possibilities of recording a given term were taken into account.

Table 1 Number of publications on a given topic—individually Term number Phrase Number of articles 1 CRM system 4,978 2 Customer relationship management system 5,715 3 SME 34,739 4 Small and medium enterprise 27,307 5 Omni-channel 261 6 Omni-channel 315 7 Omni channel 1,043 8 GST 31,462 9 Grey system theory 9,697 10 GIA 2,956 11 Grey incidence analysis 2,157 Source Own work based on the Scopus database 116 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Table 2 Number of publications on a given topic—collectively Term number Phrase Metaphrase Number of articles 1 CRM system CRM 8,971 2 Customer relationship management system 3 SME SME 46,060 4 Small and medium enterprise 5 Omnichannel OMNI 1,276 6 Omni-channel 7 Omni channel 8 GST GST 41,090 9 Grey system theory 10 GIA GIA 5,096 11 Grey incidence analysis Source Own work based on the Scopus database It was then decided to aggregate the same terms, recorded in different ways, into groups.

To this end, phrases were searched for in pairs, searching for the sum of both sets (OR operator). Table 2 presents a term-related aggregated number of publications. Comparing the results in both tables, it can be concluded that within a given article a given phrase is sometimes recorded in several ways. Therefore, the results in Table 2 are not the exact sum of the results from Table 1.

From the perspective of the object and subject of research, by far the most numerous groups in Table 2 are publications devoted to various aspects of SME. CRM and omnichannel systems, as narrowly specialized terms, constitute smaller groups. The advantage of CRM publications over omnichannel should not come as a surprise. After all, the former term is historically older. Hence, it already has significant output.

From the perspective of the research implementation tool, the smaller number of publications dedicated to GIA, as one of the detailed solutions of GST (a larger number of articles), is very natural. However, the most interesting was the search for interrelationships between individual phrases. Based on Table 2, a phrase search was made in pairs, looking for the common part of both sets (AND operator).

The interrelationships of terms through the prism of the number of publications are presented in Table 3 (explanation of the meaning of numbers in parentheses in the part devoted to qualitative analysis—Sect. 2.2). The final results of the quantitative analysis of the publications are very interesting. The subject of CRM in the context of SME has already been of considerable interest to scientists (247 articles).

However, omnichannel issues in CRM systems are just beginning to be discussed—just 11 articles. In the SME fraction, omnichannel is characterized by an even greater niche of interest (only 4 articles). GST has already been used as part of CRM (14 articles) and SME (34 articles).

However, its specific Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 117 Table 3 Number of publications on a given topic—reports CRM CRM SME OMNI GST GIA x 247 11 (10) 14 (4) – x 4 – – x 259 SME OMNI GST GIA x 3 (2) x Source Own work based on the Scopus database tool—GIA—has so far been used only in a pilot form and only on the basis of SME (only 3 articles), no use of GIA in the context of CRM systems and omnichannel.

GST has never been used as a research method or tool in the context of omnichannel. 3 Quality Analysis Out of 11 publications in the CRM—OMNI relation, 1 will be intentionally omitted— a conference report. Table 4 presents a brief description of each publication. The publications in Table 4 span the last 5 years. In this case the bottom limit is the moment the concept of omnichannel appears. The number of publications is increasing.

At the moment, there are no clearly dominant authors or scientific centres (individual articles). France and the United Kingdom show a slight dominance. The discussed issues are most often placed in the areas of: Business, Management and Accounting; Computer science. From the citations’ point of view, particular attention should be paid to the following articles: Picot-Coupey et al. (2016), Kung et al. (2008), Khan and Faisal (2015). Only 4 publications are dedicated to the SME—OMNI relationship.

Table 5 presents a brief description of each of them. The publications in Table 5 also span the last 5 years. The number of publications is also increasing. At the moment, there are no clearly dominant authors or scientific centres (individual articles). The issues in question are most often placed in the area of Business, Management and Accounting. From the citations’ point of view, attention should be paid especially to the article by Khan and Faisal (2015).

SME—GIA relationships were identified only in 3 (de facto 2) publications. Table 6 presents a brief description of each of them. The publications in Table 6 span only 4 years. Quite puzzling is the lack of publications after 2014, which may indicate the lack of GIA’s interest in the SME area. An interesting observation is the fact that both publications come from China, from which the grey system theory originates. They are placed in the areas of: Computer Science; Engineering.

It is also peculiar that none of the publications have yet been cited.

118 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Table 4 List of articles about CRM and omnichannel systems Author Year Scope of interest Vasiliev and Serov 2019 An economic—mathematical omnichannel model of sales management system in banking Prodanova and Van Looy 2019 The evolution of business process management through different social media tools as a means to achieve a transition toward the recommended omnichannel management approach Ieva and Ziliani 2018 The explosion in the number of touchpoints is putting pressure on companies to design omnichannel customers’ experiences aimed at achieving long-term customer loyalty Církovský and Maryška 2018 To provide a concept of customer relationship management systems usage for complex campaigns in the healthcare area Won 2018 A case study of Lotte Shopping—the company is trying to reinforce the omni-channel strategy, which can create synergy among various distribution channels based on its core competences Critchley 2018 Description of set up the Dynamics 365 Online system for sales, customer service, marketing Park and Lee 2017 The retailers recognize the importance of the mobile channel as an efficient sales channel and as a tool for CRM—to explain channel choices in the omni-channel environment Taufique Hossain et al.

2017 Additional research is required to know more novel outcomes of the channel integration within omnichannel services marketing Picot-Coupey et al. 2016 The challenges faced in shifting to omni-channel strategy are so numerous and so engaging that, de facto, it is impossible to evolve directly from a multi-channel, siloed strategy to an omni-channel strategy without any transition Hutchinson et al.

2015 Illustrates the value of a structured, formal CRM system which helps SME retailers compete in a complex, competitive and omni-channel marketplace Source Own work based on the Scopus database Out of 14 publications in the CRM—GST relation, 10 will be intentionally omitted—conference reports (Feng and Mei 2010), accidental hits (Chang et al. 2017). Table 7 presents a brief description of each publication. The publications in Table 7 span the period of 9 years.

The number of publications has a fixed tendency. At the moment, there are no clearly dominant authors or scientific centres (individual articles). China—the homeland of grey system theory— shows a slight dominance. The considered issues are most often placed in the area of: Computer Science. From the citations’ point of view, particular attention should be paid to articles such as: Govindan et al. (2016), Xiong et al. (2016).

Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 119 Table 5 List of articles about SME and omnichannel Author Year Calderón et al. 2019 Analyses the development of exploitation and exploration capabilities, and the role of ambidexterity, in the evolution of small Spanish wineries toward the multi-channel distribution system Scope of interest Kim et al.

2018 The omni-channel platform represents the most sustainable approach for small business owners undergoing difficulties such as technological and organizational changes Heidekröger et al. 2018 Omni-channel management is one trend that is increasingly gaining attraction, that profound understanding of influencing factors for sales and service to small and medium enterprises (SME) is missing Hutchinson et al.

2015 Illustrates the value of a structured, formal CRM system to help SME retailers compete in a complex, competitive and omni-channel marketplace (repeating—see: Table 4—last row) Source Own work based on the Scopus database Table 6 List of articles about SME and GIA Author Year Scope of interest Tang and Wang 2014 Applying the grey incidence analysis method to study the GEM listed companies internal control effectiveness (repeating—see: —Tang and Wang 2013 row below) Tang and Wang 2013 Applying the grey incidence analysis method to study the GEM listed companies internal control effectiveness Yong 2011 A detailed analysis on the structure and environment of China’s e-commerce development by means of grey incidence analysis Source Own work based on the Scopus database Table 7 List of articles about CRM and omnichannel systems Author Year Scope of interest Govindan et al.

2016 Proposes an integrated grey DEMATEL method to consider interdependent relationships among the 3PL provider selection criteria Orzan et al. 2014 Some elements taken from grey systems are used in the relationships between the advertising campaigns and the buyers’ decisions Hu 2010 Based on the grey-fuzzy theory, it constructs a grey-fuzzy comprehensive performance evaluation model for the CRM system, and verifies the model’s scientificalness and feasibility through empirical study Xiong et al.

2008 Identifies customer behaviour using a grey correlation model to evaluate proposed segmented customers in CRM Source Own work based on the Scopus database 120 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Out of 34 publications in the SME—GST relation, 17 will be intentionally omitted—conference reports (Církovský and Maryška 2018), accidental hits (Hutchinson et al. 2015). Table 8 presents a brief description of each publication. The publications in Table 8 span the period of 14 years.

They concern the aspects of: modelling (programming), forecasting, decision making or controlling. For explanatory issues, authors usually use grey incidence analysis (GIA), grey model (GM) for predictive issues, and grey decision making (GDM) for design issues. The number of publications has a fixed-increasing tendency. At present, the only author with more than 1 publication (two) is Kung.

As for nationality, it is definitely dominated by China (13 articles)—that is where GST comes from—Jiangsu University (2 publications), and also Taiwan (3 articles)—Chaoyang University of Technology (also 2 publications). The considered issues are most often placed in the Table 8 List of articles about SME and GIA Author Year Scope of interest Chang et al. 2017 Data smoothing index—forecasting Zeng et al.

2017 Grey relational analysis—selection of SME-specific ERP systems Khan and Faisal 2015 Grey-based model—ERP vendor selection Zhang and Chen 2014 Grey prediction model—predicts the monetization ratio and financial interrelations ratio Tang and Wang 2014 Grey incidence analysis—study the GEM listed companies internal control effectiveness (repeating) Tang and Wang 2013 Grey incidence analysis—study the GEM listed companies internal control effectiveness Zhang et al.

2012 Grey prediction model—forecast the sales for the next decade Yong 2011 Grey incidence analysis—analysis on the structure and environment of China’s e-commerce development Li et al. 2011 Grey-relational theory—system of technological SMEs’ financing capability Feng and Mei 2010 Grey relativity analysis—the electronic commerce application decision-making in SMEs Lingyu et al.

2009 Grey relation—fuzzy multi-criteria decision making (FMCDM) Ma and Fan 2009 Grey-fuzzy theory—risk evaluation of networked SME cluster Cheng and Wang 2009 A grey hierarchy evaluation model—assess destructive innovation risks quantitatively Kung et al. 2008 Grey statistic method—evaluate the optimal distribution for strategic resources in medium and small enterprises Sun et al.

2007 Grey correlative degrees of the factors—marketing mix effectiveness Kung 2005 Grey system method—assess the enterprise’s decision on marketing resource distribution and its performance Chen et al. 2004 Fuzzy-grey comprehensive evaluation method—safety management of small and medium enterprise Source Own work based on the Scopus database Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 121 areas of: Decision Sciences; Computer Science; Engineering; Business, Management and Accounting.

From the citations’ point of view, particular attention should be paid to articles such as: Li et al. (2011), Khan and Faisal (2015), as well as: Církovský and Maryška (2018), Cheng and Wang (2009), Chen et al. (2004). 4 Summary of Literature Analysis The qualitative analysis of publications leads to the conclusion that the number of publications in the context of the research interests of this article is even smaller than it initially resulted from the quantitative analysis of the publications.

The results of literature research show a clear gap in the issue of omnichannel CRM systems (only 10 publications). Out of 247 CRM publications dedicated to SMEs, only 4 deal with omnichannel issues—therefore, the niche deepens even more. GST, or its specific tool—GIA, have never been used as an instrument in omnichannel testing (double lack of publication). An incidental use of GST in the context of CRM has been reported (4 publications).

Therefore, GIA is a new research tool not yet used by any of the researchers. This broader literature research is a development of earlier authors’ pilot studies regarding a comparative analysis of the functionality of CRM systems, carried out on a case study—the software service provider (Domański and Filipiak 2019).

To sum up, the originality of this article is based on: 1. undertaking a very niche topic—SME-dedicated CRM systems enabling the implementation of the omnichannel concept; 2. a pioneering solution to the problem based on an innovative research tool—the GIA method from the GST family. As part of the practical part, the CRM system specification dedicated to SMEs will be proposed for companies that use the omnichannel approach.

Then, CRM systems for SMEs available on the market will be assessed in terms of meeting their omnichannel requirements. 5 Methodology for Testing CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs in Terms of Omnichannel The author’s research methodology consists of 4 main steps (Fig. 1). First, research objects (CRM systems) were determined.

To this end, research was conducted on the Internet, based on CRM system rankings published on the web—including https://crm.financesonline.com/, https://www.sellwise.pl/rankingnajlepych-systemow-crm-2019/, https://www.g2.com/categories/crm, https://www. capterra.com/customer-relationship-management-software/, 07.03.2020) as well as websites of manufacturers of individual CRM systems.

Based on the available lists of CRM systems on the market, all those that were not dedicated to small and medium 122 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Start Determination of research objects Determination of research methods Preparing and conducting research List of CRM systems Research methods Review of CRM systems CRM systems dedicated to SME Analysis of research methods for selected CRM systems Selection of GST – GIA Specifying system evaluation criteria CRM system evaluation criteria for SME Development of an application for conducting research Collecting and inputting data into the application Performing calculations Inference Analysis of results Stop Fig.

1 Original research methodology. Source Own work enterprises were rejected (systems for large enterprises were omitted from the beginning). The selection identified 84 CRM systems for small and 53 for medium-sized enterprises. Among the selected CRM systems, only 48 of them are dedicated to SMEs at the same time. By rejecting strictly specialized systems, the authors identified 31 common, universal CRM systems that will be covered by the study.

These are: Act!, Agile CRM, Avochato, Close, Creatio, EngageBay, eWay-CRM, Freshsales, HubSpot, InfoFlo, InStream, Microsoft Dynamics 365 Sales, NetHunt, NetSuite, Onpipeline, Oracle EBS CRM, Pipedrive, Pipeliner, Prophet CRM, Really Simple Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 123 Systems, Salesflare, Salesforce, SAP CRM, Shape Legal, treak, SuiteCRM, Sumac, Upsales Sales and Marketing Platform, vCita, Zengine, Zoho.

The next step in preparing the study was to review the research methods that can be used (step 2). Based on authors’ earlier experience (Wojciechowski and Hadaś 2020), it was decided to use the GIA method from the grey system theory, because it perfectly fits into the research assumptions, i.e. a description of reality, a small research sample required, unknown distribution of variables. In addition, as demonstrated in the light of literature analysis (Sect.

2), the GIA method is a pioneering research tool that the authors undertake. Then the systems that went on to the next stage were evaluated by current users (y1)—the presence and scope of operation of individual modules was examined (step 3).

The assessment by system users included, among others, possibilities of managing contacts and relations with business partners, task and schedule management in terms of marketing channels, technical support, reporting and analyses, integration with other platforms, possibilities for mobile devices and social media, awards and certificates possessed, costs of purchasing a given system. The final step in collecting data was to define criteria related to omnichannel in CRM systems.

On this basis, it was decided that CRM systems will be compared in terms of integration of customer service channels (x1) and the possibility of using these channels. Selected channels in CRM systems included: email (x2), an enterprise or store website (x3), social media (x4), chat with employees (x5) and telephone contact (x6). For the operational needs of the study, the authors developed a simple IT application.

The final stage of the research methodology—analysis of results and inference (step 4) will be described later in the article as a separate fragment (Sect. 5). 6 Implementation of the Study of Omnichannel CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs The first step is to collect data and fill in Table 9 where the numbers in the top row correspond to consecutive enterprises: y1 is the characteristics of the CRM system, i.e.

in this case the overall rating of the system by users (it can take values from 0 to 10; 10 maximum rating), while all other factors from x1 to x6 determine the impact on this characteristic (factor x1 can have values: 0—no integration, 0.5—integration of not all channels of the CRM system, 1—full integration of all channels; factors from x2 to x6 adopt binary values: 0—the channel is not present in the system, 1—the channel is present in the system).

The next step compared the results of 31 CRM systems (IDs from 2 to 32 in Table 9) against the ideal CRM system (column 1)—representing the maximum values in each row that exists only hypothetically and was determined artificially for the purposes of the study. According to the assumptions of the grey system theory, Si and Sj coefficients are used for comparisons. The following formulas were used for calculating Si, Sj and Sj—Si (Liu et al. 2017).

124 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Table 9 Collected input data for calculations using the GIA method Id 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 y1 10.0 8.0 8.4 8.8 9.4 9.3 8.9 8.5 9.6 9.8 9.1 9.4 7.4 8.4 9.5 8.2 x1 1 1 1 0 0.5 1 0 0 0.5 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 x2 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 x3 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 x4 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 x5 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 x6 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 id 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 y1 8.6 9.4 9.1 8.2 8.5 8.8 9.7 8.2 8.5 9.0 8.4 8.5 8.5 8.8 9.0 9.4 x1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 x2 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 x3 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 x4 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 x5 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 x6 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 Source Own work based on CRM systems rankings and CRM manufactures’ websites  n−1    1   |si | =  xi (k)d2 + xi (n)d2   2 k=2  n−1      1  s j  =  y j (k)d2 + y j (n)d2   2 k=2  n−1       1  s j − si  =  y j (k)d2 + xi (k)d2 + y j (n)d2 − xi (n)d2    2 k=2 Table 10 presents a screenshot of the application in which the data collected in Table 9 were processed.

The consecutive columns provide the ID of the factor, then the sum in the rows (Sum for y or x), the value of the last row (Last one for y or x), the result of calculating the value of Sj for y (the second row of the column Sj, Si), the result of calculating the value Si for each factor x (rows 3 to 8 in the column Sj, Si)—the first 7 columns are used to improve calculations in the application, and a fragment of the appropriate partial calculations (from the 8th column)—the essence of the logic of the GIA method.

On the basis of data from Table 10, after calculating the values of Sj and Si, the absolute value of Sj–Si was determined, which illustrates the degree of influence of a given factor x on the general characteristics of the CRM system y. The results of the calculation are presented in Table 11.

Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 125 Table 10 Results of comparison of each company’s score to master model Id Sum y or Last y or Sj, Si Sum Sj, 1 x x Si 1 2 3 … 30 31 32 y1 −36.7 −0.6 s1 36.4 10 y1 0 −2 −1.6 … −1.2 −1 −0.6 x1 −16.0 0 s2 16.0 1 x1 0 0 0 … −1 0 0 −5.0 0 s3 5.0 1 x2 0 0 0 … 0 0 0 x3 −14.0 0 s4 14.0 1 x3 0 −1 −1 … 0 0 0 x4 −23.0 0 s5 23.0 1 x4 0 0 −1 … 0 −1 0 x5 −18.0 0 s6 18.0 1 x5 0 −1 0 … 0 −1 0 x6 −13.0 0 s7 13.0 1 x6 0 0 … 0 0 x2 −1 0 Source Own work Table 11 Sum of x1–x6 values from the table Sj–Si y1 x1 20.4 x2 31.4 x3 22.4 x4 13.4 x5 18.4 x6 23.4 Source Own work The epsilon coefficient indicates how much each of the x factors affects the characteristics of the y system, i.e.

customer satisfaction. The formula for calculating the epsilon coefficient (Liu et al. 2017). ε0i = 1 + |S0 | + |Si | 1 + |S0 | + |Si | + |Si − S0 | The final results of the GIA method, after ordering all the factors x by the descending degree of importance, are presented in Table 12.

Table 12 Results of epsilon value in a descending order 0.818428 x4 0.750678 x5 0.723577 x1 0.696477 x3 0.682927 x6 0.574526 x2 Source Own work 4.246612 y1 126 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Finally, as part of extending the research process beyond the GIA method, it was decided to determine the ranking of CRM systems based on the weighted mean method. The values for the factors are data from Table 9, the weights for the factors are set out in Table 12.

Table 13 presents a weighted ranking of CRM systems. Table 13 Comparison of weighted mean and user rating ID Name Weighted mean 9 Hubspot 1.00 9.80 12 Microsoft Dynamics 365 Sales 1.00 7.40 31 Zoho 1.00 9.40 6 EngageBay 0.83 8.90 29 vCita 0.83 8.80 20 Really Simple Systems 0.81 8.50 26 SuiteCRM 0.81 8.40 1 Act!

0.66 8.00 24 Shape Legal 0.64 8.50 28 Upsales Sales and Marketing Platform 0.63 8.50 30 Zengine 0.63 9.00 8 Freshsales 0.55 9.60 10 InfoFlo 0.50 9.10 18 Pipeliner 0.49 9.10 2 Agile CRM 0.48 8.40 3 Avochato 0.47 8.80 14 NetSuite 0.47 9.50 13 NetHunt 0.47 8.40 7 eWay-CRM 0.46 8.50 15 Onpipeline 0.46 8.20 16 Oracle EBS CRM 0.34 8.60 5 Creatio 0.33 9.30 25 Streak 0.31 9.00 22 Salesforce 0.31 9.70 21 Salesflare 0.30 8.80 4 Close 0.22 9.40 11 InStream 0.18 9.40 23 SAP CRM 0.16 8.20 17 Pipedrive 0.14 9.40 27 Sumac 0.14 8.50 19 Prophet CRM 0.00 8.20 Source Own work User rating Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 127 One interesting issue is the Prophet CRM system, the result of which is zero (last row in Table 13).

This CRM system does not use any customer service channel—it rather serves as a database. Finally, it was decided to divide the CRM systems listed in Table 13 into classes— the author’s view.

It was decided to distinguish the following classes and their ranges: – 1.00—reference CRM systems, support all 5 customer service channels and integrate them with each other; there are 3 reference systems; – 0.81–0.83—very good CRM systems, not much different from the standards, but with shortcomings—they support 4–5 customer service channels and try to integrate them; for selected industries, they may as well meet the reference systems if the company does not intend to use the service channels missing in these systems; there are 4 very good systems; – 0.63–0.66—medium class of CRM systems, support 4 different customer service channels, but often do not integrate them; due to the lack of integration and support for only a few customer service channels in the medium class of CRM systems, there are large gaps in customer service, which means that such systems have a low impact on omnichannel; there are 4 medium class systems; – 0.46–0.55—CRM systems below the medium class, systems in this class support a maximum of 3 channels, very often not integrating them all together; these CRM systems are more suitable for single or multichannel than for omnichannel; there are 9 systems below the medium class; – <0.34—a class that most often supports a maximum of 2 different customer service channels; channel integration, if present, combines data of only 2 channels; therefore, systems of this class are suitable for enterprises that prefer a single or double channel approach; there are 11 systems in this class.

Referring to Table 13, the results of the authors’ research (weighted mean) were confronted with the views of users of CRM systems (user rating). The authors’ research was strictly focused on the possibilities of omnichannel functioning in CRM systems for SMEs, while users of CRM systems evaluated these systems from different, broader angles. Therefore, both classifications do not match and cannot be compared with each other.

7 Final Conclusions Based on the results, it can be seen that in CRM systems evaluated in terms of the omnichannel approach, the social media channel is the customer service channel that has the greatest impact on the value of the system. The use of social media in CRM systems allows to reach a large number of customers in a non-intrusive way. In the second place was chat with an employee, i.e. a form of direct contact with the customer, which is not as official as the letter.

Chat can be conducted for a longer period of time, and while doing so one can break away to focus on other activities, which may be the reason for considerable impact of this customer service channel 128 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski on the CRM system assessment. Only in the third place, somewhat surprisingly, is the integration of the channels. This solution allows customers to smoothly change the service channel used in the rapidly changing reality of everyday life.

Website, which is a rather a static source of information, ranks fourth. The fifth position is phone contact—a form that requires the greatest attention from both sides. Email is the customer support channel that has the least impact on CRM rating. The reason for this may be the universality of this channel including the amount of spam customers are flooded with. To sum up, providers of CRM systems for SMEs focus primarily on modern customer service channels—social media and chat.

This corresponds to the profile of today’s digitized customer (a cell phone or a laptop in the continuous internet access mode). It is technically feasible today—widespread availability of information technologies (hardware and software). More traditional forms of service—website, telephone contact, e-mail—are beginning to lose their importance.

Omnichannel, identified with the integration aspect of customer service channels (factor x1-3rd position), is already clearly noticed, yet not fully appreciated. Based on the results of the study, it can be concluded that omnichannel is implemented in CRM systems for SMEs only partially (1 for factor x1 in Table 9). Still half of the customer service interactions (0 for factor x1 in Table 9) are implemented through different, non-integrated channels—a multichannel approach.

The market for popular, universal CRM systems is not very saturated—only 31 applications. Among these CRM systems, the authors diagnosed only 7 as prochannel CRM systems (classes: reference and very good)—it constitutes only 23% of the total number of applications. The integration of customer service channels turned out to be a key selection factor.

Most CRM systems for SMEs focus only on the functioning of a certain number of channels (not all possibilities) and they cannot integrate them into one coherent system (fragmentary solutions). Future research, based on this preliminary study, should focus on changing research subject from SME CRM to large enterprise CRM systems. Another possibility for future research is to focus deeply on SME CRM systems to create a relational network between all objects in terms of using omnichannel.

Acknowledgments This research was funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education— project No. 11/140/SBAD/4171. References Calderón H, Fayos T, Frasquet M (2019) The transition of small Spanish wineries toward multichannel distribution: the role of ambidexterity. Int J Wine Bus Res 32(1):139–158 Chang C-J, Lin J-Y, Jin P (2017) A grey modeling procedure based on the data smoothing index for short-term manufacturing demand forecast.

Comput and Math Organ Theory 23(3):409–422 Chen Y, Wu S, Liu S (2004) Application of fuzzy-grey comprehensive evaluation method in safety management of small and medium enterprises. Proc Int Symp Safety Sci Technology, ISSST 2004:2034–2041 Comparison of CRM Systems Dedicated to SMEs … 129 Cheng Q, Wang M (2009) Risk analysis and evaluation of the destructive innovation in small and medium-sized enterprises, Proceedings of international conference on management and service science, MASS 2009, art.

no. 5305759 Církovský T, Maryška M (2018) Usage of advanced CRM campaigns in medical therapy. Proceedings of 26th interdisciplinary information management talks, IDIMT 2018, pp 259–265 Critchley S (2018) Dynamics 365 CE essentials: administering and configuring solutions, 1st Edition, Apress, pp 1–613 Domański R, Filipiak P (2019) Omnichannel in CRM systems from the perspective of the software service provider. In: Dujak D (ed.

), Proceedings of the 19th international conference business logistics in modern management, Josip Juraj Strossmayer University, Osijek Croatia, pp 21–41 Feng Y, Mei Q (2010) Research on electronic commerce application decision-making in China SMEs. Proceedings of the international conference on e-business and e-government, ICEE 2010, art. no. 5590920, pp 4386–4389 Govindan K, Khodaverdi R, Vafadarnikjoo A (2016) A grey DEMATEL approach to develop third-party logistics provider selection criteria.

Indust Manag Data Syst 116(4):690–722 Heidekröger R, Heuchert M, Clever N, Becker J (2018) Towards an omni-channel framework for sme sales and service in the B2B telecommunications industry. Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik, MKWI 2018:386–397 Hu G-L (2010) Performance evaluation of enterprise CRM system based on grey-fuzzy theory, International Conference on Networking and Digital Society, ICNDS 2010, art. no.

5479195, pp 32–35 Hutchinson K, Donnell LV, Gilmore A, Reid A (2015) Loyalty card adoption in sme retailers: the impact upon marketing management. Eur J Mark 49(3–4):467–490 Ieva M, Ziliani C (2018) The role of customer experience touchpoints in driving loyalty intentions in services. TQM J 30(5):444–457 Khan H, Faisal MN (2015) A Grey-based approach for ERP vendor selection in small and medium enterprises in Qatar.

Int J Busin Inform Syst 19(4):465–487 Kim H, Lee D, Ryu MH (2018) An optimal strategic business model for small businesses using online platforms, Sustainability (Switzerland), 10(3), art. no. 579 Kung C-Y (2005) Grey system method to assess enterprise’s decision on marketing resource distribution and its performance—the experience of taiwanese medium and small manufacturing industries.

Proc Int Confer Sys Man Cybern SMC 2005:1562–1567 Kung C-Y, Yan T-M, Huang C-C (2008) Using grey statistic method to evaluate the optimal distribution for strategic resources in medium and small enterprise. Proceedings of international conference on systems, man and cybernetics, SMC 2008, art. no. 4811732, pp 2866–2871 Li J, Sun D, Xia W, Xue Y (2011) AHP-based grey relational comprehensive evaluation method of the capability of technological SME’s financing.

Proceedings of international conference on business management and electronic information, BMEI 2011, art. no. 5920924, pp 85–88 Lingyu H, Bingwu L, Juntao L (2009) An ERP system selection model based on fuzzy grey TOPSIS for SMEs. Proceedings of 6th international conference on fuzzy systems and knowledge discovery, FSKD 2009, art. no. 5358953, pp. 244–248 Liu S, Yang Y, Forrest J (2017) Grey data analysis. methods, models and applications.

Springer Singapore, pp 76–81 Ma Z-Q, Fan Q (2009) The study on risk evaluation of networked SME cluster based on gray-fuzzy theory. Proceedings of international conference on management and service science, MASS 2009, art. no.

5303826 Orzan G, Ioanas E, Delcea C, Orzan MC (2014) Impact of social media advertising campaigns on buyers’ decisions, Proceedings of the 24th international business information management association conference, IBIMA 2014, pp 2038–2051 Park S, Lee D (2017) An empirical study on consumer online shopping channel choice behavior in omni-channel environment.

Telematics Inform 34(8):1398–1407 130 R. Domański and H. Wojciechowski Picot-Coupey K, Huré E, Piveteau L (2016) Channel design to enrich customers’ shopping experiences: synchronizing clicks with bricks in an omni-channel perspective—the Direct Optic case. Int J Retail Distribut Manag 44(3):336–368 Prodanova J, Van Looy A (2019) How beneficial is social media for business process management? a systematic literature review. IEEE Access, art. no.

8663288, pp 39583–39599 Sun X-X, Amit M, Cao P-G (2007) Grey correlative degree analysis on factors of small and mediumsized enterprise marketing mix. Wuhan Ligong Daxue Xuebao/Journal of Wuhan University of Technology 29(6):143–146 Tang X, Wang C (2014) GEM listed companies’ internal control effectiveness based on grey incidence analysis. J Grey Syst 26(2):38–48 Tang X, Wang C (2013) The research of GEM listed companies’ internal control effectiveness based on grey incidence analysis.

Proceedings of international conference on grey systems and intelligent services, GSIS 2013, art. no. 6714738, pp 38–43 Taufique Hossain TM, Akter S, Kattiyapornpong U, Wamba SF (2017) The Impact of integration quality on customer equity in data driven Omnichannel services marketing. Procedia Comput Sci 121:784–790 Vasiliev SA, Serov ER (2019) Omnichannel banking economy.Risks 7(4), art. no. 115 Wojciechowski H, Hadaś Ł (2020) Ranking of opportunities for implementing the omnichannel concept.

Logforum 16(2):229–237 Won EJS (2018) Pioneering the distribution industry in Korea: dynamic capability at lotte shopping. J Distribut Sci 16(10):5–21 Xiong W, Chen L, Zhan GZ, Qiu Z (2008) RFM value and grey relation based customer segmentation model in the logistics market segmentation. Proceedings of international conference on computer science and software engineering, CSSE 2008, art. no. 4723147, pp 1298–1301 Yong L (2011) Grey incidence analysis on China’s e-commerce development.

Proceedings of international conference on electronic and mechanical engineering and information technology, EMEIT 2011, art. no. 6023903, pp 3859–3862 Zeng Y-R, Wang L, Xu X-H (2017) An integrated model to select an ERP system for Chinese smalland medium-sized enterprise under uncertainty. Technol Econ Dev Econ 23(1):38–58 Zhang B-X, Hu S-Q, Song J, Cheng S (2012) Analysis about medium-long-term demands forecasting and capacity decision based on the grey GM(1,1) improved models.

Proceedings of international conference on management science and engineering, art. no. 6414194, pp 276–281 Zhang Q, Chen R (2014) Financial repression approach to the financing difficulty of the small and medium-sized enterprises: Empirical evidence from China. Proceedings of 6th international conference on business intelligence and financial engineering, BIFE 2013, art. no.

6961129, pp 240–244 Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State in Selected European Countries Joanna Oleśków-Szłapka, Irena Pawłyszyn, Francesco Facchini, Agnieszka Stachowiak, and Ana Paula Tanajura Ellefsen Abstract The topic of green mobility is very interesting and indispensable to consider due to European policy and climate changes.

Cities are now actively starting to address these issues by implementing a range of different strategies, such as bringing in congestion charges and parking fees to internalise the negative impacts of transport (E. Commission in How can cities address future mobility challenges? 2019), improving and promoting the use of public transport (PT), encouraging nonmotorised transport with dedicated pedestrian-bike paths, and restricting the access of certain vehicles to the city centre.

The main objective of hereby chapter is to evaluate actual state in terms of green mobility in selected European countries such as Poland, Ukraine, Italy and Norway. Authors endeavor to assess the availability, comfort, technical condition, safety, environmental friendliness, amenities in the cities from the point of view of existing public transport such as trams, buses, urban scooters, city bikes, electric kick scooters, carsharing.

Keywords Green mobility · Sustainable transport · Urban transportation · Mobility solutions · Sustainability J. Oleśków-Szłapka (B) · I. Pawłyszyn · A. Stachowiak Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland e-mail: joanna.oleskow-szlapka@put.poznan.pl I. Pawłyszyn e-mail: irena.pawlyszyn@put.poznan.pl A. Stachowiak e-mail: agnieszka.stachowiak@put.poznan.pl F. Facchini Polytechnic University of Bari, Bari, Italy e-mail: francesco.facchini@poliba.it A. P. Tanajura Ellefsen Tesla, Norway e-mail: anapaula_tanajura@hotmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_9 133 134 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al. 1 Introduction City logistics covers all activities in the urban agglomeration supported by modern information systems, which aim to improve the network of goods and information flow.

Activities implemented under its assumptions place great emphasis on both the economic and ecological aspects of the expected effects. The tasks of urban logistics include reducing the number of cars on the streets, reducing exhaust emissions or choosing optimal routes and frequencies for public transport, taking into account various social events.

Transportation is one major source accounting for nearly a quarter of Europe’s total greenhouse gas emissions and is the main cause of air pollution in cities (E. Commission 2016). Reducing fossil fuel-based travel is therefore crucial for both the local and global climate and has become a major policy objective for nationaland city- governments across the globe (Moran et al. 2018).

The importance of green mobility is underscored in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and the New Urban Agenda. Green mobility is a broad concept that aims to simplify a diverse set of environmental impacts caused by the transport sector. Many countries are already taking climate change mitigation seriously through transport system improvement. However, climate action in the transport sector still has a long way to go.

Green and sustainable cities present fundamental opportunities to both apply new technologies (such as public transit, district heating, and green building and design) and bring about major lifestyle changes (such as walking, bicycling, and reductions in consumption). There are, in fact, many different terms used today in discussing efforts to reduce environmental impacts and to live more lightly on the land.

Sustainable development, sustainable communities and sustainable cities are a few of these terms (Beathley 2000). One increasingly popular shared mobility service is bike sharing and such systems have appeared in cities across the world as a green transportation measure (DeMaio 2009; Shaheen et al. 2013; Fishman 2016; Pucher and Buehler 2017; Hamilton and Wichman 2018).

The main objective of hereby chapter is to evaluate actual state in terms of green mobility in selected European countries such as Poland, Ukraine, Italy and Norway. Authors endeavor to assess the availability, comfort, technical condition, safety, environmental friendliness, amenities in the cities from the point of view of existing public transport such as trams, buses, scooters, city bikes, electric kick scooters etc.

Authors compared city mobility in selected European cities such as Poznan (Poland), Bari (Italy), Oslo (Norway) and Lviv (Ukraine) based on primary and secondary sources of data. The authors of the article conducted research to answer the following research questions: RQ1: What means of transport are used the most common in analyzed cities? Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 135 RQ2: Do the respondents in the analyzed cities use green transport?

RQ3: What factors influence the choice of a particular means of transport? Poznan is a city located in central-western Poland in the Greater Poland Lakeland, on the Warta River. It is the capital of the Greater Poland Voivodeship and the Poznan County. It is inhabited by 538,6 thousand people, which makes it the sixth largest city in Poland and the fifth largest in terms of population. Collective public transport in Poznan and the Poznan agglomeration is organized by the City Transport Board (ZTM).

The main operator in the city and the surrounding area that provides bus and tram transport services is Miejskie Przedsi˛ebiorstwo Komunikacyjne sp.z o.o. (MPK). The rolling stock belonging to MPK consists of 221 tram sets and 311 buses. Currently, the authorities of the city are implementing the “City of Poznan Cycling Program 2017–2022 with a perspective to 2025”, which aims to improve the movement of cyclists and increase the interest of residents in the daily use of bicycles.

The plan includes, inter alia, the construction of new bicycle routes, Bike & Ride parking lots, the extension of the Wartostrada, as well as education and promotion for conviction to ride a bicycle. Lviv is a city located in the west of Ukraine. It is an important industrial centre, an air, rail and road hub. Lviv is the seventh largest city in the country (724.713 people) and is considered as a centre of western Ukraine.

There are 4 types of public transport in Lviv: tram, trolley bus, bus and small urban buses (so-called marshrutka).1 In 2017, the number of public transport vehicles was 631, but the strategy of developing city transport by the end of 2020 assumed an increase in the rolling stock to 730 vehicles, which is expected to result in an increase in transport capacity from 127,680 to 196,840 passengers. The bus transport system in Lviv creates 7 radial bus routes and 45 circular routes.

Radial routes connect the outskirts of the city with the central ring and are served by buses with high and very high capacity. Circular routes, in turn, connect the city’s outskirts. The capacity of buses serving these routes is 35 people. In total, the city supports 575 buses. In addition to bus lines, the city has 11 tram lines and 9 trolleybus lines. The demand for electric transport has increased in recent years.

While building the Strategy for the development of public transport, the city authorities plan to implement systems enabling the purchase of an electronic ticket, creating a Park & Ride point on the radial end loops, increasing the share of public transport in the city’s road traffic and limiting traffic in the centre of Lviv. A bicycle rental service has also appeared in the city since 2016. Bari is a big port city on the Adriatic coast; the capital of the Italian region of Puglia.

The city itself has a population of 320,257 inhabitants. Within Bari city itself there are urban buses services operated by a municipalized company, founded in 1965, called AMTAB. The company has a fleet of 234 buses, most of them powered by diesel, only a part (less than 20%) is powered by methane (Hosseini et al. 2019). Starting from 2020 will be included 2 electric buses. The average age of the available buses is around 10 years.

There are 39 lines allow to serve 303 km, in last year around 1 Marshrutka—is a small bus, designed to carry 9–20 passengers, not including the driver. 136 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al. 25 million of the persons were transported. According to last ‘Urban Sustainable Mobility Plan’, around 74% of people prefer private car or motorbike (52% and 22%, respectively) for move around the city, 18% of person prefer the public transport, and 5% of person adopt private bikes (Carli et al. 2015).

Currently, only a 3% of persons in Bari adopt the service like bike-sharing, for this scope in last three years (2017– 2019) 135 e-bikes have been provided by municipality of Bari (Ranieri et al. 2018; Digiesi et al. 2017). The carsharing service, provided by a national public company (ACI), was started in 2017, when the city received a fleet of 10 electric cars.

The town of Bari promotes the use of bicycles, an eco-friendly means of transport that is both fast and efficient, through Bike Sharing (Barinbici), a bike rental service located in different locations around the city. The “Cicloattivi and the University” (biking) is a project promoted by the Puglia region and allows university students to rent folding bikes for a year, as well as promoting sustainable mobility and intermodal transport by both train and bus.

Oslo is an old town, but a relatively young city, and it has developed extensively in twentieth century as Norway has urbanized. In 2018 the city had a population of 673,469. Oslo has made generous use of fossil fuel dependent transportation technologies to access ever larger hinterlands in search of space for populations. Thanks to its green reputation, the city has won two prizes from the European Union for developing as a green city (Luccarelli and Røe 2013).

This is a city with ambitious environmental targets aiming at reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 50% within 2030 (Plansamarbeidet 2015). Oslo has had a bikesharing scheme since 2002 (Alvik 2009). City council’s proposition suggests several measures for the various municipal sector programs. For the transport sector, the most important measures are to ensure transition from individual car transport to public transport, increased cycling and walking.

Public transport in Oslo is coordinated by Ruter AS and constitutes a network of travel possibilities by train, tram, subway, bus and boat almost 24 h per day. By 2020, public transport in Oslo will only use renewable energy. After that, all city buses will also have the Euro VI standard on their engines, which will significantly reduce both noise and local pollution. All public transport in the Oslo metropolitan area must be emissions-free by 2028 (Oslo Komune 2020).

2 Methodology Authors will utilize following embedded case study methodology and survey research: statistical analysis (sampling scheme), developed survey questionnaire, applied survey and analysis of the results. Based on obtained results chapter presents a comprehensive analysis and indicate future actions in order to increase green mobility and sustainability of city means of transportation.

Authors try to point out how to boost the competitiveness of transport industries in selected European countries and how to achieve a city transport system Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 137 that is resource-efficient, climate and environmentally friendly, safe and seamless for the benefit of all citizens and society.

Questionnaire developed by authors consists of 64 questions including respondent’s particulars.2 The main section comprises questions with respect to means of transportation, available public transport options in given city and assessment of time, cost, distance of public transport. The other sections are divided dependent on particular means of transportation such as urban bikes, public transport (buses/trams etc.

), carsharing, electric kick scooters, small urban buses, urban scooters and other means of transportation. Most of questions use Likert scale – five-point agreement scale used to measure respondents’ agreement with a variety of statements by means of unipolar scales. 2.1 Research Results As a result of the survey, which was conducted at the turn of January and February 2020, over 2000 responses were obtained from all analyzed cities.

The respondents to whom the survey was addressed are young people (over 97% of respondents are people under 25 years of age) studying at universities. About 26% of respondents are also employed. In terms of gender, 45% of women and 55% of men took part in the survey. The results of the collected responses of the respondents are presented below. The first question of survey asked the respondents what means of communication they use most often.

Respondents could indicate several means of transport which they most often use on a daily basis. The Fig. 1 shows the distribution of respondents’ answers. It can be seen that young people from Poznan, Lviv and Oslo most often choose public transport, i.e. trams, buses and trolleybuses, as the main means of transport (Poznan—almost 95% of respondents; Lviv—91% of respondents, Oslo— 73.7% of respondents).

Students from Lviv also often use marshrutkas (small urban buses), which are also part of public transport (38% of respondents). Just over 10% of respondents from Poznan, 3% of respondents from Bari and 1.6% of respondents from Lviv use city bikes. Only 4.5% of respondents use electric kick scooters available in Poznan, currently such means of communication is not available in Lviv, Oslo and Bari. Lviv, Bari and Oslo are also not equipped with urban scooters.

On the other hand, In Poznan only 0.5% of respondents use them. Therefore, the conclusion is that the use of city bicycles, electric kick scooters or urban scooters is poorly developed in the analyzed cities, and therefore more attention should be given to them in the context of their development and promotion.

On the contrary, data from secondary sources show that the city bike network in Oslo is very well developed, which makes it possible 2 In this article, the authors will present selected questions from the survey and throw spotlight on the results obtained. 138 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al. Fig. 1 The distribution of answers on question 1. (Source Own elaboration) to conclude that respondents prefer other means of transport or their own bicycles instead of city bikes.

In Oslo quite big number of respondents (15.3%) use carsharing whereas Poznan and Lviv have a similar level of carsharing (around 2%). In Bari such service is not used by interviewees. It should be noted that in Bari the highest number of respondents (i.e. 63.3%) indicated their own car as the most preferred means of transport. A fairly large group of respondents, as in Oslo, Poznan and also in Lviv prefer to travel by their own car (36.8%, 26.3% and 20.3% respectively).

The second question concerned the recognition of which of these means of communication are actually available in specific cities (Fig. 2). Respondents from Poznan, Oslo and Bari indicated that all suggested types of communication are available in the city, but there are no marshrutkas in these cities. Most likely, they confused the means of transport with ordinary buses. This means that the question posed has not been formulated precisely enough.

A similar situation occurred in the case of Lviv, Oslo and Bari, where there are no urban scooters and electric kick scooters rental points and which, apparently, were treated as privately owned means of transport. Third and fourth question in the survey verified how many respondents spend time on commuting every day (Fig. 3a), as well as what average distance they travel each day (Fig. 3b).

Figure 3a shows that almost 63% of respondents from Poznan require up to 1 h for travel time every day, and about 32% of those surveyed spend 1–2 h on travel. In Lviv, near to 73% of respondents devote up to 1 h commuting time and about 24%—up to 1–2 h. In Bari and Oslo also most of the respondents spend to transport up to 1 h (respectively near to 52% and 69%). Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 139 Fig. 2 The distribution of answers on question 2. (Source Own elaboration) Fig.

3 The distribution of answers on questions 3 and 4. (Source Own elaboration) In turn, Fig. 3b shows that just over 29% of students from Poznan travel daily up to 5 km, 33%—from 5 to 10 km/day and 16.4%—from 10 to 15 km/day. Quite a large group (13.4% of respondents from Poznan) travels over 20 km every day. In Lviv, the situation is slightly different: 39% daily travels up to 5 km, almost 38%—from 5 to 10 km/day and 13%—from 10 to 15 km/day.

In Oslo, the results obtained are very similar to the situation in Poznan. In Oslo, the results obtained are very similar to the situation in Poznan, solely more people travel more than 20 km a day (26.3% of respondents). In Bari, a smaller number of respondents have to pass a distance of 5–10 km (about 15% of respondents) and most surveyed have to travel more than 20 km (almost 43% of respondents). 140 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al.

The above results may be dictated by the fact that Poznan is a more geographically spread city compared to Lviv, and therefore students are forced to travel a greater distance. Whereas In Bari and Oslo students commute to studies from districts and smaller villages outside the city centre, which is confirmed by the results obtained. In the next—fifth—question authors asked what is the average monthly amount of charges incurred for transport.

In Poznan students pay monthly near to 13.5 EUR (56 PLN), in Lviv 10.47 EUR (290.29 UAH), in Bari 40 EURO and in Oslo 82.36 EUR (959 NOK). Comparing the costs to average wages in individual countries, it should be noted that the costs dedicated to communication in Poznan constitute 1.4% in relation to the net remuneration in Poland (average monthly salary in 2019—962 EURO). In Lviv these costs amount to 2.75% compared to the net salary in Ukraine (average monthly salary in 2019—381 EURO).

In Bari it is 3.24% respectively (average monthly salary in 2019 in Italy—1233 EURO) and in Oslo—2,72% (average monthly salary in Norway in 2019—3033 EURO). It can be seen that the highest percentage of costs is paid by Bari respondents. Students from Lviv as the second in a comparative analysis pay a fairly large percentage of transport costs. Oslo ranks third in this respect and the smallest percentage of communication costs in relation to average earnings is paid by respondents from Poznan.

The sixth question refers directly to public transport, and more precisely—the frequency of its use by respondents. Figure 4 shows that 98.25% of people use Poznan trams and buses. Similarly, in Lviv, 96.41% of people use trams, trolley buses and city buses, and almost 81% of respondents use marshrutkas. In Oslo public transport is mainly used by 84.21% of respondents. In the contrary in Bari the percentage share of student commuters using public transport is much lower (48.48% of respondents). Fig.

4 The distribution of answers on question 6. (Source Own elaboration) Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 141 A significant difference can be seen in the case of city bikes, which are used by 63.16% of respondents in Oslo, 32.13% of respondents in Poznan and only 6% in Bari and less than 4% in Lviv. 16.62% of students in Poznan use electric kick scooters.

The obtained research results draw attention to the need to develop particular types of communication, as it will directly contribute to the development of green mobility in the city. Less than 4% of respondents use urban scooters in Poznan, and 9.15% carsharing. The carsharing has generated small interest among Lviv students and Bari students alike (6.37% and 3.03% respectively). Such mode of transport is not popular because of its cost.

On the other hand, 47.37% students from Oslo indicated that they use carsharing. It may also be dictated by the better financial standing of students in Norway. Figure 5 is the answer to the seventh question—how often do people use public transport? An analysis of the answers obtained indicates that in Poznan 66.41% of respondents use public transport every day, and 22.51% use it at least several times a week.

1.34% and slightly more—2.68%—ride a city bike ride in Poznan every day, several times a week. Almost 95% of respondents from Poznan have never used urban scooters, less than 90% have never used carsharing, almost 77% have never used electric kick scooters and almost 60% have never used city bikes. In Oslo similar to Poznan near to 60% of respondents use public transport every day.

In the contrary in Lviv, none of the respondents use city bikes every day, rather young people use a given means of communication several times a month (5.58%) or several times a year (9.56%). In Bari solely 18.18% of respondents use public transport every day and 36,36% surveyed have never used such means of transportation. Fig. 5 The distribution of respondents in question 7. (Source Own elaboration) 142 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al.

In Lviv, hardly more than 43% of respondents use public transport and 17,13% of respondents use marshrutkas every day. Several times a week, almost 40% of people use public transport, while 34.66% use marshrutkas. Almost 83% surveyed have never used urban bikes in Lviv and 81,27% have never used carsharing. Respondents were also asked about the reasons for not using certain means of communication.

Among the reasons for not using city bikes, respondents in Poznan most often indicated a complicated procedure for renting them (25.8%), lack of comfort (19.9%), too long distance to travel (19.2%) and a high price for the service (17, 9%). In Oslo 66,7% prefer different mode of transport. The other reasons they mentioned: too long distance to travel (40%), bad infrastructure of urban bike paths (26,7%), lack of comfort (26,7%), travel time too long (20%).

Lviv respondents pointed out that the lack of use of city bikes is primarily related to poor cycling infrastructure (35.8%), lack of comfort (27.6%), lack of safety (21.1%) and too long distance to travel (20.7%). In Bari the most important obstacles to use city bikes are as follows: prefer different mode of transport (14.8%), too long distance to travel (16.8%), bad technical condition of city bikes (22.2%), complicated procedure for renting them (14.8%).

On the basis of above results, it can be seen that students do not prefer city bikes due to lack of comfort and too long distance to travel. The lack of use of electric kick scooters in Poznan is primarily due to the excessive price (57.3%), lack of comfort (23.8%) and lack of safety (20.8%). Regarding the last reason, the respondents have repeatedly indicated that there are no clear rules regarding how to move the scooter around the city.

Exactly the same hierarchy of answers was obtained by the reasons for not using urban scooters in Poznan (25.5%, 20.9% and 16.1% respectively). People who do not use carsharing in Poznan indicated that the price of a given service is too high (50.8%), rental rules are risky (39%) and that the rental procedure is too complicated (19.9%). In Oslo 14,3% of respondents also agreed that rental procedure is too complicated.

Almost 43 students in Oslo prefer different mode of transport and 7% of them do not have driving license. In Lviv, respondents also do not use carsharing, because they think the price is too high (58.3%), the rules for renting a car are risky (30.1%), and the renting procedure is too complicated (28%). It should be mentioned that in all cities respondents clearly see the prospects for the development of such public transport as bicycles, electric kick scooter or urban scooters.

The eighth question was asked to indicate the level of satisfaction of respondents with the use of specific means of transport (Fig. 6). It can be seen that the use of public transport in Poznan is rated. Almost 35% of respondents assess their level of satisfaction as average for the use of trams and buses. In turn, 52.88% of respondents are satisfied with the use of city bikes, and 38.12% are average satisfied with the use of a given means of transport.

55.04% of respondents indicate that their level of satisfaction with the use of electric kick scooters is high or very high, while little above 32% of respondents define this level as average. For urban scooters, the figures are: 52.45% - satisfied and very satisfied, 29.37% - average satisfied. With regard to carsharing, almost 64% of respondents described their level of satisfaction as high/very high, and 26.32% as average.

It should be noted here that for any means Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 143 Fig. 6 The distribution of answers on question 8. (Source Own elaboration) of communication the “very low level of satisfaction” option did not exceed even 5%, and the “low level of satisfaction” option—9%, except for city scooters, which received 13.29% of respondents’ answers in a given option.

This means that travelers are generally satisfied with the available means of transport in the city of Poznan. It is also interesting that public transport received the smallest percentage of negative answers—6.14% (the sum of the answers “low level of satisfaction” and “very low level of satisfaction”). In Lviv, public transport is rated at an average level of satisfaction—55.82% of responses. At a high and very high level, it was rated by slightly over 12%.

Even less respondents are satisfied with the use of marshtrutkas—3.9% satisfied and 45.45% average satisfied with traveling on a given means of transport. For city bikes, the satisfaction level reaches 31.58% (the sum of “high” and “very high”). In turn, 54.39% of respondents indicated that they are average satisfied with their use. On the other hand, carsharing shows 32.65% satisfied users and 57.14% average users.

Respondents indicate that over 32% are not satisfied with the use of public transport (the sum of “low” and “very low” responses), and more than 50% of respondents are not satisfied with the use of small urban buses (the sum of “low” and “very low”). The results are a signal as well as a direction of development which the city government should focus on.

In Bari the majority of respondents evaluate all means of public transport at average level (public transport—near to 54%, urban bikes—57%, carsharing—40%) Only about 11% of surveyed students are satisfied with using public transport at very high and high level and almost 35% is not satisfied (sum of results “low” and “very low). Similar answers can be observed for carsharing (33% of surveyed students). 144 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al.

From the other hand 6,67 of respondents if very high satisfied and 20% of respondents is high satisfied using carsharing services. The number of answers placed in the middle of the rating scale indicates great opportunities to improve the current level of satisfaction. In Oslo comparing to other cities the level of satisfaction is the highest. Public transport obtained almost 50% of satisfied answers indicating “very high” and “high” options.

30% of respondents is also satisfied with using city bikes and 77,78% of respondents is satisfied with carsharing services. In both cases the sum of “high” and “very high” answers is taken into account. The number of received responses can on the one hand confirm the quality of transport services offered in Oslo as well as be proof of the level of life satisfaction among students in Oslo.

The goal of the ninth question was to identify the most important advantages of different modes of public transport (Fig. 7). In Poznan the respondents indicated that public transport’s (i.e. trams and buses) biggest advantages are: accessibility (18.17%), price (65.25%) and travel time (49.56%). As the fourth criterion, the respondents distinguished health and ecology (25.66%).

Speaking about city bikes, the respondents consider health and ecology (44.43%), accessibility (31.55%) and price (25.95%) as the biggest advantages. In turn, the biggest advantages of electric scooters are accessibility (23.62%), comfort (18.72%), health and ecology (17.90%) and travel time (17.84%). Poznan respondents use scooters because of travel time (12.71%), comfort (11.37%) and accessibility (8.1%).

Carsharing is chosen primarily for comfort (23.44%), privacy (19.94%) and travel time (12.01%). In Lviv, the biggest advantages of public transport are the price (65.34%), accessibility (60.16%), comfort (36.65%) and travel time (27.49%). Marshrutkas are Fig. 7 The distribution of answers on question 9. (Source Own elaboration) Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 145 chosen primarily for their availability (48.61%), price (35.06%), travel time (30.68%) and comfort (29.08%).

Respondents use city bikes because of their health and ecology (31.08%), comfort (17.53%) and accessibility (13.55%). On the other hand, carsharing services in Lviv were used for the same reasons as in Poznan: comfort (21.91%), privacy (18.73%) and travel time (13.55%). In Bari the respondents pointed out the most important advantages of public transport: price (39.39%), availability (30.3%), comfort (24.24%), health and ecology (24.24%).

Whereas urban bikes and electric kick scooters received the most indications on health and ecology (respectively 63.64% and 45.45%). The travel time and comfort were evaluated at lower level comparing to public transport. (12% for city bikes and 15% for electric kick scooters). Carsharing was evaluated at similar level (from 12 to 18% of respondents) regarding travel time, safety, privacy and comfort.

Comparing to Poznan and Lviv price for public transport is recognized as smaller advantage probably due to higher prices for public communication. In Oslo the most respondents selected price as the biggest advantage for public transport (almost 79% of respondents) despite the fact that in this city prices for public transport are the most expensive.

The other circumstances for above transport are availability (63.16% of respondents), health and ecology (almost 32% of respondents), travel time and comfort (both about 21% of answers). The health and ecology for city bikes was chosen by a similar number of surveyed as in Bari and Poznan. Another advantage was price (26.31% of surveyed) and availability (15.79% of surveyed). More respondents than in other cities chose the advantage of comfort for carsharing (almost 32%).

In all cities, the most important advantages of public transport are, therefore, price, availability and travel time, bicycles as a means of transport are chosen primarily for health and environmental reasons, and carsharing is enjoyed by people who value privacy and comfort. Owing to the tenth question, it was possible to obtain information on how respondents assess the technical condition of individual means of communication (Fig. 8).

The condition of Poznan trams and buses is rated as good by 33.20% of respondents and rather as good by 51.08% of respondents, which in general constitutes nearly over 84% of positive answers. The condition of city bikes in Poznan is assessed as good by 19.79% of respondents and by 40.28% of respondents as rather good. The distribution of answers regarding the electric kick scooters indicated 27.41% of satisfied users and 42.07% of rather satisfied users, respectively.

Subject to urban scooters (it should be mentioned that this is the mode of transport that is least often used by respondents in Poznan) the percentage of the highest indications is about 32.97% and the percentage of “rather good” answers is 34.41%. The technical condition of shared cars is evaluated as good by 46.13% of respondents and rather good by 32.87% of respondents. City bikes received the largest percentage of negative responses (16%).

Therefore, one should pay attention to a given means of communication, because poor condition of bicycles may lead to a collision or accident of road users. In Lviv, the situation is as follows: the technical condition of public transport is assessed as good in 5.65% of cases and in 30.24% of cases as rather good. The sum of positive answers is therefore less than 36%. The technical condition of marshrutkas 146 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al. Fig. 8 The distribution of answers on question 10.

(Source Own elaboration) is the worst of all these types of communication in Lviv. Only 2.16% of respondents indicated good technical condition of vehicles and less than 15% indicated rather good condition, which in total gives less than 17% of positive opinions. The technical condition of city bikes is definitely better, as 20.31% of respondents indicated that they rated their condition as good, and 45.31%—rather good, which gives 65.63% of positive responses.

The condition of rented cars in carsharing is also positive: 29.17% of respondents rated their condition as good and 33.33%—rather good. City authorities should devote considerable attention to the technical condition of public transport, as well as small urban buses, since it is the latter means of transport which has obtained the largest percentage of negative responses (56.71%).

In Bari almost 18% of respondents assess technical condition of public transport as very good and 32.14% as rather good. On the other hand, the similar number of answers select condition rather bad and bad (28.57% and 10.71% respectively). Considering urban bikes 45.45% of respondents cannot decide how to evaluate their technical condition. At the same time 36% of surveyed think that this condition is very good and good.

None of respondents suggest that technical condition of urban bikes and carsharing is bad. Almost half of research sample cannot decide how to assess the technical quality of carsharing. This distribution of answers may result from the number of respondents who do not use selected means of transport, preferring their own car.

In the last of the cities surveyed (Oslo) more than 50% of respondents recognized a technical condition of public transport as good and rather good but also nearer to 36% evaluate this condition as bad and rather bad. This may be due to the varied technical condition of different vehicles in public transport.

City bikes according to Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 147 surveyed are in a good condition (25% of respondents) and simultaneously in a bad condition by the same number of respondents. The better situation is for carsharing, 50% of respondents evaluate its technical condition as good and 33.33% as rather good.

In each city, the technical condition of the available urban mobility modes should be analyzed and, if possible, dependent on technical resources further improvements should be done. The last eleventh question that the authors will present under this article will be the assessment of the amount of fees for individual means of communication (Fig. 9). 35.2% of Poznan users determine that the prices of city buses and trams are high or very high. Prices are medium for more than half of users (51.23%).

As for city bikes, in 17.47% of cases, fixed usage prices are perceived as high or very high, and in 41.45% of cases—as medium. Poznan respondents estimate the prices for renting scooters and scooters as definitely too high (81.53% and 68.38% respectively of the indications “very high price” and “high price”). This confirms the previously presented information on the reasons for not using the means of transport. The fee for car renting is also considered as too high (67.90%).

Lviv public transport is rated as expensive or very expensive in 35.89% of cases. Over half of the respondents (52.82%) determine public transport charges at medium level. In the case of small urban buses, 48.7% of users indicated that the charges for a given means of transport are high or very high. 48.44% think marshrutkas charges are moderate. For bicycles, just over 40% of users’ prices are too high or high, and 48.44% see them as medium.

Carsharing is perceived as the most expensive in Lviv, where exactly half of the respondents consider car rental too expensive or expensive, Fig. 9 The distribution of answers on question 11. (Source Own elaboration) 148 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al. and 42.59%—as medium. At this time, information about the reasons for not using carsharing in Lviv due to the high price of the service is also confirmed.

From Bari respondents’ point of view the fees for public transport are very high (10.34%) and high (27.59%). At the same time 48.28% of them perceive these fees as medium. The answers for city bikes are divided in very similar proportions: 30% of respondents assess fees as high and very high, medium and low. The fees for carsharing are definitely too high (37.5% of respondents—very high, 50% of respondents—high).

In Oslo almost 20% of respondents perceive fees for public transport as very high and high. Whereas by 42% of respondents their level is medium and by 31.58% of respondents is low. Urban bikes’ fee by more than 60% of surveyed are assessed as high and medium (in each group 33% of answers). The level of fees was assessed as low and very low: for carsharing by 33% of respondents, urban scooters by 25% of respondents, city bikes by 33% of respondents.

There are many aspects that can affect the assessment of the price level of various means of public transport in the cities analyzed. Therefore, detailed conclusions depend on the level of earnings, correlation between the frequency of journeys and the distance to overcome. The above results show that in Italy and Norway prices are generally perceived as lower compared to Poland and Ukraine, which may be conditioned by the social status of citizens.

The exception is the assessment of carsharing services in Bari. 3 Conclusions Summing up the results of the conducted analyses, it should be stated that the most common means of transport used by respondents of the surveyed countries is public transport. Similarly, a large proportion of people prefer their own means of transport. Further research directions should include verifying the criteria encouraging owners of their own vehicles to switch to public transport, including bicycles or scooters.

Research also indicates that a significant proportion of respondents never use green transport such as bicycles or electric kick scooters. This is dictated by the lack of services in the city, or a weak marketing campaign encouraging potential users to use the given means of transport. Interestingly, one of the problems with using such services is, according to respondents, the complicated procedure for renting a bicycle or electric kick scooter.

The request is a signal to the city authorities to work on simplifying such procedures as well as explaining on a larger scale how to rent a specific means of transport. Review also reflects the need to modernize transport rolling stock in three of the surveyed cities, as respondents show average satisfaction with its use. Despite this, respondents distinguish the price as the main advantage of public transport in all countries.

At this point, further research directions could include queries regarding users’ consent to temporarily increase prices for public transport in order to modernize transport rolling stock. Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 149 Positive in all four cities is the fact that answerers see opportunities for developing green mobility in their cities.

This signals the awareness of the respondents about the impact of transport on the natural environment, so they expect for infrastructural and informational support from the authorities. Public transport showed the most minimal changes, with demand remaining constant over the study period. The main improvements were in technology, such as smart-phone apps to buy tickets and check timetables.

In Italy there are plans underway to develop bike sharing schemes in different cities including Bari, with funding provided by the national government. The environmental benefits of bike sharing are at its best when bike sharing does not substitute walking, cycling or public transport and when it is combined with public transportation in covering the first and last mile of public transportation journeys. Making cities smarter and more sustainable is a major aim of the European Union.

Improving the sustainability of transport is prioritized through measures such as encouraging cycling, improving public transport and providing incentives for lowemission vehicles. Bicycle sharing programmes serve as an alternative transportation mode in cities and provide public access to pick-up and drop-off bikes at numerous locations (Shaheen 2010; Kuppusamy et al. 2019).

The potential environmental benefit of such programmes is however debated as a considerable number of trips are substituting other green transportation modes and the sustainable impact of bike sharing is argued to be limited (Fishman et al. 2013). The use of a bicycle for everyday travel is particularly advantageous over short distances. According to research carried out in the European Union, the average distance of most displacements carried out in cities does not exceed several kilometres.

At such distances—considering the traffic congestion—a bicycle may turn out faster than a car and public transport. Mobility is one of the most difficult topics to face in metropolitan large areas. It involves both environmental and economic aspects and needs both high technologies and virtuous behaviors’ people.

Among the solutions that can improve the conditions of cycling in the city include: creating bicycle paths that run in the field regardless of the road system or within the lane, separating bicycle lanes on the road, separating bus and bicycle lanes, two-way bicycle traffic allowed on one-way streets with limited traffic and speed with the possible separation of a counter-cycle for bicycles, introduction of bicycle locks at intersections with traffic lights, introduction of markings for cyclists (organizational and information), allowing the transport of bicycles in public transport, adaptation of interchanges to leave bicycles in the “park and ride” system, introduction of a city bike rental system.

There is a need to continuously monitor mobility initiatives, for example by using the indicator-based assessment to ensure projects are implemented effectively and to understand what aspects of governance help ensure sustainable-transport schemes are realized. Transport is one of the most important factors determining the country’s economic development.

A well-developed transport infrastructure strengthens the social, economic and spatial cohesion of the country and contributes to strengthening the 150 J. Oleśków-Szłapka et al. competitiveness of the Polish economy. Modern infrastructure and an effective transport system are conducive to the country’s economic growth, and the country’s location on international transport routes is one of the important competitive advantages.

Mobility in urban areas is also an important facilitator for growth and employment and for sustainable development. The main contribution of this article is the assessment of actual situation in terms of different mode of transport. Authors plan to develop herein research in order to recognize green mobility activities in surveyed cities. Another perspective will be also the evaluation of support given by city authorities and European Union funds.

Due to Logistics 4.0 trends it will be valuable to recognize actual trends towards efficient, connected and automated transport systems that are sustainable, safe and accessible for all citizens. Acknowledgments The authors want to thank everyone who participated in the survey.

References Alvik A (2009) Bysyklene Beathley T (2000) Green urbanism, learning from European cities Carli R, Dotoli M, Pellegrino R, Ranieri L (2015) Using multi-objective optimization for the integrated energy efficiency improvement of a smart city public buildings’ portfolio. In: IEEE international conference on automation science and engineering DeMaio P (2009) Bike-sharing: history, impacts, models of provision, and future.

J Public Transp Digiesi S, Fanti MP, Mummolo G, Silvestri B (2017) Externalities reduction strategies in last mile logistics: a review. In: Proceedings—2017 IEEE international conference on service operations and logistics, and informatics, SOLI 2017 E. Commission (2016) A European strategy for low-emission mobility, 20/07/2016—COM 501. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_16_2497. E. Commission (2019) How can cities address future mobility challenges?

[Online]. Available: https://urban.jrc.ec.europa.eu/thefutureofcities/mobility#_edn1. Fishman E (2016) Bikeshare: a review of recent literature. Transp Rev Fishman E, Washington S, Haworth N (2013) Bike share: a synthesis of the literature. Transp Rev Hamilton TL, Wichman CJ (2018) Bicycle infrastructure and traffic congestion: evidence from DC’s capital bikeshare.

J Environ Econ Manage Hosseini SM, Carli R, Dotoli M (2019) Robust day-ahead energy scheduling of a smart residential user under uncertainty. In: 2019 18th European control conference, ECC 2019 Kuppusamy GP, Thakkar C, Zheng Y (2019) Bikesharing: analysis and prediction.

In: SIGITE 2019—Proceedings on 20th annual conference on information technology education, vol 4, no 2009, p 157 (2019) Luccarelli M, Røe PG (2013) Green Oslo: visions, planning and discourse Moran D, Kanemoto K, Jiborn M, Wood R, Többen J, Seto KC (2018) Carbon footprints of 13 000 cities. Environ Res Lett Oslo Komune (2020) [Online]. Available: https://www.oslo.kommune.no/ Plansamarbeidet (2015) [Online]. Available: https://plansamarbeidet.no/.

Pucher J, Buehler R (2017) Cycling towards a more sustainable transport future. Transp Rev Ranieri L, Digiesi S, Silvestri B, Roccotelli M (2018) A review of last mile logistics innovations in an externalities cost reduction vision. Sustain Sustainable City Mobility—Comparison of Actual State … 151 Shaheen SA (2010) Bikesharing in Europe, the Americas, and Asia: past, present, and future. Transp Res Rec J Transp Res Board Shaheen S, Cohen A, Martin E (2013) Public bikesharing in North America.

Transp Res Rec Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India Pankaj Kant and Sanjay Gupta Abstract Urban freight transport is integral to the overall sustainable development of cities in tandem with passenger transport. This research chapter is based on an empirical study carried out in the city of Jaipur in north India.

This chapter presents traffic & parking regulation strategies from literature and intends to come up with aggregate weightage and ranking of different strategies for sustainable freight mobility for Jaipur city. Analytical Hierarchical Process (AHP) and Best Worst Method (BWM) are used to assess the weights. Both AHP & BWM are multicriteria decision-making techniques, thus useful in selecting the most relevant freight strategies for sustainable urban goods distribution in case city.

Hypothesis for selecting AHP & BWM is that both methods produce similar results. This chapter critically analyses the traffic & parking regulation strategies in the preview of wholesalers, transport operators and local policymakers involved in urban goods distribution in case city. Primary data and response were collected with face to face paper–pencil survey from stakeholders in case city for selection and ranking of freight strategies.

Response received from 32 stakeholders of Jaipur is used for analysis. The policy implications based on this study demonstrates the potential utility of AHP & BWM as a decision-making tool in urban freight sector in India.

Keywords Sustainability · Freight strategies · AHP · BWM P. Kant (B) · S. Gupta Transport Planning Department, School of Planning and Architecture, 4-Block-B Indraprastha Estate, New Delhi 110002, India e-mail: pankaj179phd17@spa.ac.in S. Gupta e-mail: s.gupta@spa.ac.in © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_10 153 154 P. Kant and S. Gupta 1 Introduction There are growing concerns for the impacts of urban goods distribution in urban areas for congestion, externalities, infrastructure vulnerability and consistency with land use. Sustainability of urban goods transport is the key policy objective of various countries (OECD 2003).

Sustainable transportation is essential for overall sustainable development due to its contribution to externalities, economic and social issues (Gudmundsson et al. 2015). Strategies and key performance indicators (KPI) are used for the decision-making process, travel patterns, physical impacts, environmental effects and economic impacts (Litman 2006). Decision-making, simulation and diagnosis are critical objectives of urban goods studies.

Freight strategies are required and helpful for decision-makers to achieve sustainable development objectives (Litman 2019). Local authorities and policymakers have low awareness and knowledge regarding urban freight sector due to complex supply chains of urban goods and multiple stakeholders involvement. It is tough to predict the outcomes of freight policies and strategies (Patier and Routhier 2008).

There is a need to raise awareness for freight issues considering all relevant stakeholders (Lindholm 2010). Heterogeneous nature of urban freight stakeholders and goods movement characteristics in the city poses a key challenge to policymakers to select suitable freight strategies for sustainable goods distribution. Freight strategies for sustainable urban goods distribution are not adequately addressed in India.

This research paper evaluates the weights of various traffic and parking regulation strategies for sustainable urban goods distribution for Jaipur city (India) by the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) and Best Worst Method (BWM) method. AHP & BWM are useful tools for dealing with complex decision making. AHP and BWM aid the decision-maker to make the best decisions (Ruescha et al. 2012; Saaty 2008).

The next section presents a literature review related to freight strategies used in urban goods distribution. Section 3: case city profile and wholesale commodity market selection. Section 4: research methodology. Section 5: AHP & BWM model formulation. Section 6: AHP & BWM analysis of urban goods strategies and the last part, Sect. 7: presents conclusions and policy implications.

2 Literature Review Effect of urban freight transport can be quantified under the transport fleet, urban deliveries, economy, environment and safety. Each category required a different kind of freight strategies (Rezaei 2015). Urban freight data of 56 cities from 32 countries were compiled and analysed in-depth for various urban freight strategies implemented based on their final results. A total of 48 freight strategies under seven major group were identified for investigation.

A multicriteria scoring function was used to rank & weight urban freight strategies of 56 cities (BESTUFS II 2006). Urban freight strategies under three groups i.e., last-mile, environment and trade Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India 155 node strategies were identified for sustainable urban goods distribution. These three group consists of 21 urban freight strategies already implemented by various cities around the globe.

There is more need for research for intracity freight movements and the effectiveness of existing policies and freight measures (BESTUFS 2006; Holguín-Veras et al. 2018). Several types of traffic, building and vehicle regulations freight strategies are identified (Dablanc et al. 2013). The study concluded Seven groups of sustainable policy measures and company actions to mitigate the negative impact of urban freight for economic vitality and quality of urban life.

The study also considers the barriers and difficulties in implementing freight measures for the sustainability of urban freight transport. Policy measures are grouped at the level national, urban scale and also focused for shippers, receivers and transport operators (Transportation Research Board 2013).

There is a lack of interaction and understanding between administrators and other stakeholders of urban freight like transport operators and retailers in finalisation and implementation of freight strategies (Ogden 1992). Preferences and characteristics of stakeholders involved in urban goods distribution are essential for the success of city logistics policies and strategies.

City logistics freight strategies and measures should complement the issue related to policymakers, freight demand and supply (Browne and Allen 2011). International best practice in sustainable urban freight strategies on the basis of their strength and weakness have been extensively compiled for local policymakers and private stakeholders. Aspects of sustainability, i.e. economic, environment and society, has been addressed in organising urban freight strategies (Pronello and Valentinaa 2017).

Divergent objectives of shippers and transport act as a barrier in the implementation of urban freight initiatives, and there is a need for dialogue between urban freight stakeholders (Visser et al. 1999). Different freight operation strategies need to be considered for collaborative and systematic examination for management and operations during transportation project design and development (CIVITAS 2015).

Urban freight strategies need to be formulated on the basis and issues faced by urban goods movement. Design standards, infrastructure design, land use zoning and truck regulation are some key issues that need to considered for freight strategies (Duin et al. 2018). Freight strategies and their integration in land use plan enhance the sustainable goods supply and transport in urban areas.

No single freight measure but a bundle of freight measures along with close cooperation between the administration and private stakeholders are required for sustainable transport in urban areas (Lindholm 2010). Transport management plan (TMP) strategies are often selected without comprehensive information of its potential benefits and disadvantages (US-DOT 2013).

A small improvement in freight efficiency can provide considerable benefits due to large movements of big trucks in goods distribution (Litman 2006). Framework for identification and selection of freight strategies by incorporating stakeholders concerns is essential for sustainable freight transport. Modelling and evaluation of freight strategies are also vital in the range of available freight strategies (NCFRP report 2012).

156 P. Kant and S. Gupta AHP method was used to evaluate the choice of transportation alternatives in the multimodal freight transport system (DoT 2012). AHP method has a wide variety of applications like Performance type problems, resource management, corporate policy, public policy, political strategy, and planning. AHP method is easy to use, scalable, and it’s not data-intensive (Sharma et al. 2017).

AHP method can be applied within the context of the stakeholder-driven or institutional approach to transport project evaluation (Kopytov and Abramov 2012). BWM method was used for evaluation and supplier selection in the context of social sustainability (Velasque and Hester 2013). BWM was used to evaluate the different factors affecting the energy efficiency of buildings along with barriers to mitigate these factors.

Results show that economic, governmental and technological barriers as the most prominent barriers among all (Brucker et al. 2011). BWM is preferred methods to use when deciding on weights for parameters as it easy to understand (Bai et al. 2019). Various freight strategies are available to improve the sustainability of urban goods distribution. Impact of freight strategies can vary due to different characteristics of stakeholders involved in urban goods distribution.

Assessment of freight strategies weights will be helpful for policy intervention in urban freight distribution. 3 Methodology The objectives of this research study are to assess the weights of freight strategies across and within two wholesale markets in the city of Jaipur. These two wholesale markets are the Electronics market and Building hardware market.

Hypothesis for the research study is that freight strategies have the same relevance & importance across two commodity distribution for stakeholders. AHP & BWM methods were used to assess the weights of traffic and parking regulation strategies. Traffic and parking regulation strategies are selected based on the literature review of urban goods distribution for this research study (Holguín-Veras et al. 2018).

Parking and traffic regulation strategies are chosen in the purview of the city administrator, as they have an essential role in city logistics for managing freight traffic and providing freight infrastructure. The framework proposed for the assessment of urban goods distribution strategies and its variation for selected wholesale markets the city of Jaipur is presented in Fig. 1.

The final weights of freight strategies are geometric means of individual responses with consistency ration less than 10%. This research study is based on primary survey and data collected by face to face pen-pencil survey of shippers (wholesalers), transport operators (carrier) and local policy planners. The sample size of stakeholder is shown in Table 1. List of wholesalers was collected from the market association of both markets.

Time and date of face to face paper–pencil surveys were fixed via telephonic conversations, similarly in the case of transport operators from the transport association situated in Transport Nagar in Jaipur. Transport operators having more than two commercial vehicles has been selected for the survey. List of traffic police officers having more than two years of experience in and around these two wholesale markets Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India 157 Fig.

1 Framework for evaluating weights for urban freight strategies Table 1 Data set S.no Experts Sample size AHP Sample size BWM 1 Shippers (wholesalers) 5 5 2 Transport operators 5 5 3 Traffic management/enforcement officials 5 5 4 Urban planners 1 1 have been obtained from superintendent of police (Traffic) Jaipur. The core urban planning team of Jaipur development authority and Jaipur municipal corporation have been consulted for a detailed interview as per their available time.

A team of four trained enumerators were assigned to collect eight samples per day. Consistency of results from both methods was obtained each day for the further need of interviews on the next day until the required sample size is collected as per Table 1. 4 Case City Profile Jaipur is the capital city for the state of Rajasthan in India. The city is a major attractor of tourists and major hub for handicrafts, gems, jewellery, die printing (textile) and stone crafting.

Jaipur city is located in the north-eastern part of Rajasthan state, 158 P. Kant and S. Gupta 280 km from Delhi. Jaipur extends to an area of 2939 km2 in which walled city (old area) constitute 17 km2 , 281 km2 city area under Jaipur municipal corporation and rest is 2650 km2 under Jaipur development authority. The total population of Jaipur city is 30.5 lacs (yr. 2011).

Residential land use of city constitutes 44.8% (13,825 ha), commercial 6.7% (2064 ha), industrial 6% (1862 ha), governmental 2% (602 ha), mixed land use 3.3% (1034 ha), public & semi-public 10.5% (3241 ha), recreational 11.3% (3461 ha) and circulation 15.4% (4741 ha). In Jaipur city, there are 11 major wholesale markets. Electronics, handicrafts and pharmaceutical markets are situated in the walled city area. Fruits and the vegetable wholesale market at Muhana and Lal Kothi area.

Food grain markets at Surajpole and Kukasheda area. Dairy and meat products at Malviya Nagar and NH11 bypass. Construction material market at Aatish Nagar and Chandpole area. Furniture market at Sitapura area. Chemical and fertilisers market in Durgapaura area. Industrial products at Viskarma industrial area. Building Hardware market and Electronic market were selected for the assessment of parking and regulation strategies.

The building Hardware market is planned market recently developed by Jaipur development authority, whereas the electronics market is situated in the old city (walled city) area. Goods distribution in building hardware market is weigh based, whereas, it is number and item-based in the Electronics market. 5 AHP & BWM Methods 5.1 AHP Method Analytical Hierarchical Process (AHP) is a multicriteria decision-making technique that can help to express the general decision operations.

It decomposes a complicated problem into a multilevel hierarchical structure of objective, criteria and alternatives. AHP can combine quantitative and qualitative factors to handle different groups of stakeholders. In the AHP method, the opinions of many experts can be mixed (Serrai et al. 2017). The relative importance of criteria and alternatives are calculated by the pairwise comparison in each level of the hierarchy.

AHP method can also be used to assess the relative importance among criteria and sub-criteria. AHP is a commonly used mathematical tool, especially where subjectivity may affect the overall result of the decision-making process (JDA 2011). The relative importance of criteria or alternatives is determined on an absolute scale during a paired comparison of the hierarchy of structures. The nine-point scale is used for paired comparison.

Each point of this scale is assigned according to the intensity of importance among alternatives. Point 1 on the scale reflects that both alternatives (A&B) during comparison are equally important. Point 3 when later alternative (B) is slightly favourable than the former alternative. Point 5 when later alternative (B) is strongly favourable than the former alternative.

Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India 159 Point 7 when the later choice (B) is strongly favoured due to its demonstrated dominance. Point 9 on the scale when later option (B) affirmed on the highest possible order. Even scales (2, 4, 6 8) are used when there is a compromise between successive odd scales (1, 3, 5, 7, 9). If the former alternative (A) is more important than the latter alternative (B), then a reverse scale to be used (1/3, 1/5, 1/7, 1/9) (Sharma et al. 2008).

Results obtained from AHP methods for each criterion is in ratio scale. Weightage of each alternative is proportional to the total score of all criteria’s in the hierarchy (Semih and Seyhan 2011). The result of the pairwise comparison on n criteria can be summarised in an (n x n) evaluation matrix A. This pairwise comparison can be shown by a square matrix (1).

   a11 a12 ∗ a1m     a21 a22 ∗ a2m    A = (aij )n×m    ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗  a a ∗ a  n1 n2 nm (1) In the last step of AHP, the comparison matrix is normalised to get relative weights. The right eigenvector gives the relative weights of criteria (w) corresponding to the largest eigenvalue (λ max) as Eq. (2), Aw = λmax w (2) AHP results from the output are related to the consistency of the pairwise comparison judgments. The Consistency Index (CI) of judgments is calculated by Eq. (3) (Saaty 1987).

CI = λmax − n n−1 (3) Consistency ratio (C.R.) is the final check of results in AHP to evaluate the consistency of results. The number 0.1 (10%) is the accepted upper limit for C.R. check. The ratio of the CI and the random index (R.I.) is C.R., as shown in Eq. (4).

CR = CI RI (4) Value of random index when there are 3 alternatives is 0.58, 4 alternatives then 0.90, 5 alternatives then 1.12, 6 alternatives then 1.24, 7 alternatives than 1.32, 8 alternatives then 1.41, 9 alternatives then 1.45 and when there are 10 alternatives, then the value is 1.49 (Schoner and Wedley 1989). 160 P. Kant and S. Gupta 5.2 Best Worst Method (BWM) The Best–worst method (BWM) is a vector-based, multicriteria decision-making method.

BWM also characterised by pairwise comparison of alternatives like AHP. For BWM analysis, a set of decision criteria needs to be determined for comparison, secondly the selection of best and worst criteria without any comparison by selection maker. Then the comparison of other criteria with the best criteria. Similarly, comparison of other criteria with the worst criteria. In the last step, the optimal weights of criteria are computed.

Comparison of alternatives is conducted by using a scale between 1 and 9, where 1 = equal preference and a 9 = 9 × times more important. Higher consistency ratio results in less reliable comparisons. BWM requires fewer comparison data (alternatives) and leads to a more consistent comparison and reliable results. BWM can be combined with other MCDM methods. BWM is a more comfortable alternative of multicriteria decision-making methods (Duin et al. 2018; DoT 2012).

6 Results Seven traffic and parking regulation strategies have been evaluated for the city of Jaipur by AHP and BWM for two wholesale markets. Table 2 represents the results obtained by these two methods. All results confirm the consistency ratio of less than 10%, and final weights are the geometric mean of all individual stakeholders results.

Table 2 Traffic and parking regulation strategies for urban goods distribution Strategies Electronics market Building hardware market AHP weights BWM weights (%) (%) AHP weights (%) BWM weights (%) Day time hours truck ban 17 13 21 16 Access control for day/week/vehicle 14 19 32 25 The commercial vehicle parking plan 9 4 5 7 Off-hours use of roadways 12 17 11 10 Increased enforcement in use of loading bays 6 6 4 4 Demand dependent parking charges 8 9 6 12 Off-hours deliveries 19 28 20 22 Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India 161 Results confirm that there is variation in weights of strategies across and within markets by both methods (Table 2).

In the electronics market, both methods have given the highest weight to off-hours deliveries and the same weights to increased enforcement of loading–unloading bays. Weights for demand dependent parking charges are almost similar. For the rest of the freight strategies, there is variation in weights. In the case of building hardware market, increased enforcement of loading–unloading bays has the same weights.

Off-hours deliveries, off-hour use of roadways and commercial vehicle parking plan strategies have minimal variation in their weights by both methods. Off-hours delivery is most preferred, followed by day time truck ban for the electronics market. Access control for commercial vehicle is most preferred, followed by off-hours deliveries in building hardware market.

Increased enforcement in the use of loading bays strategy is least preferred, after commercial vehicle demand dependent parking charge strategies in both markets by both methods. Maximum variation of weights by both methods across markets are observed for day time/hours truck ban and Access control for day/week/vehicle strategies. Access control for day/week/vehicle strategy is not common in India, especially in the preview of the wholesale markets in India.

Weights for this strategy can be superseded with weights of day time/hours truck ban strategies instead of omitting from the data set. In the electronics market variation in weights of off-hour deliveries has maximum (10%) by both methods, but still, it is the most preferred freight strategy. Electronics market in Jaipur is not a planned market and situated in the walled city where parking and logistics facilities are minimal with truck ban already in place.

Wholesalers in this market receive their good at very early morning at the periphery of the walled city and use the small vehicle to place their goods in their respective warehouses. Similarly, in case of building hardware market, most interurban deliveries take place in night as big trucks can enter in the night only, this confirms the preferring off-hour deliveries and day time truck ban strategies.

Low weights for increased in enforcement in the use of loading bays strategy is due to no demarcation and designated place for commercial vehicle in case of electronics market and availability of parking place for commercial vehicle in the planned building hardware market in Jaipur. 7 Conclusions Sustainable urban goods distribution is vital for the overall sustainable development of cities.

This research paper presents how weights of freight strategies vary for different goods distribution due to their supply chains and the inherent nature of the commodity, which needs to be incorporated in sustainable urban freight transport policy. This paper demonstrates the potential utility of AHP & BWM as a decisionmaking tool for policymakers in the urban freight sector.

162 P. Kant and S. Gupta The study results confirm that there are variation and similarity in weights of freight strategies across markets by both AHP and BWM methods. Off-hours deliveries in the electronics market and day time truck ban strategies in building hardware market are most preferred. Parking related strategies like dedicated commercial vehicle parking plan, parking charges and use of loading–unloading bays are least preferred in both markets.

All these strategies have an impact on the end-users cost. Study results suggest that there is a need for the combination of freight strategies at city level according to goods characteristics and its supply chain for sustainable urban goods distribution. BMW method is more comfortable then AHP method in the context of surveying as it has the simple and lesser comparison of alternatives than AHP method, especially when the number of paired comparison is large.

Both methods are very tedious and too time-consuming for data collection. Assigning of the rating scale to alternatives is hard to explain to transport operators and wholesalers due to their low education level, especially with the AHP method.

More urban commodities and industrial products need to be explored to assess the overall weights of freight strategies within and across cities of varying sizes with easy multicriteria decision-making method in the purview of sustainable city development in India. References BESTUFS II (2006) Best urban freight solutions II. https://www.bestufs.net/download/BES TUFS_II/key_issuesII/BESTUFS_II_results_datacollection/BESTUFS_II_data_collection_s ynthesis_report.pdf.

Accessed 21 Mar 2018 BESTUFS II (2006) Quantification of urban freight transport effects I. NET, BESTUFS Bai C, Kusi-Sarpong S, Sarkis HB (2019) Social sustainable supplier evaluation and selection: a group decision-support approach. Int J Product Res 7046–7067 Browne M, Allen J (2011) Enhancing the sustainability of urban freight transport and logistics.

Transp Commun Bull Asia Pac no 80(2011):80 Brucker KD, Macharis C, Verbeke A (2011) Multicriteria analysis in transport project evaluation: an institutional approach. Eur Transp 47:3–24 CIVITAS (2015) Civitas. Eu. from ‘Making urban freight logistics more sustainable’. Civitas policy note, pp 1–63. https://www.eltis.org/resources/tools/civitas-policy-note-making-urban-fre ight-logistics-more-sustainable.

Accessed 12 June 2019 Dablanc L, Giuliano G, Holliday K, Obrien T (2013) Best practices in urban freight management: lessons from an international survey. TRB, Transp Res Rec (TRR), pp 29–38 Duin RV, Slabbekoorn M, Lori Tavasszy HQ (2018) Identifying dominant stakeholder perspectives on urban freight policies: a q-analysis on urban consolidation centres in the Netherlands.

Transport 33(4):867–880 Gudmundsson H, Hall RP, Marsden G, Zietsman J (2015) Sustainable transportation—indicators, frameworks, and performance management. Samfundslitteratur, Frederiksberg Gupta P, Anand S, Gupta H (2017) Developing a roadmap to overcome barriers to energy efficiency in buildings using best-worst multicriteria decision-making methodology.

Sustain Cities Soc 244–259 Holguín-Veras J, Leal JA, Sánchez-Diaz I, Wojtowicz MB (2018) State of the art and practice of urban freight management. Transp Res Part A Polic Pract Sustainable Urban Freight Strategies for Jaipur City, India 163 JDA (2011) Master development plan—Jaipur region. Jaipur development authority. https://www. jda.urban.rajasthan.gov.in/content/dam/raj/udh/development.../jda-jaipur/.../Part1.pdf.

Accessed 13 May 2019 Kopytov E, Abramov D (2012) Multiple-Criteria analysis and choice of transportation alternatives in multimodal freight transport system. Transp Telecommun 13(2):148–148 Lindholm M (2010) A sustainable perspective on urban freight transport: factors affecting local authorities in the planning procedures. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 2:6205–6216 Litman T (2006) Mobility management innovative management strategies to transport problems’.

In: SATC : 25th annual Southern African transport conference Litman T (2019, Mar 18) Developing indicators for sustainable and livable transport planning. www.vtpi.org/wellmeas.pdf. Accessed 9 May 2019 NCFRP 23 (2013) Synthesis of freight research in urban transportation planning. Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC NCFRP report 14 (2012) Guidebook for understanding urban goods movement.

Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, p 2011 OECD (2003) Delivering the goods: 21St century challenges to urban goods transport. https://www. itf-oecd.org/sites/default/files/docs/03deliveringgoods.pdf. Accessed 12 Apr 2019 Ogden KW (1992) Urban goods movement: a guide to policy and planning. Ashgate, London Patier D, Routhier J-L (2008) Hoe to improve the capacity of urban goods movement data.

In: Annecy: 8th international conference on survey methods in transport Pronello C, Valentinaa CC (2017) Last-mile freight distribution and transport operators’ needs: which targets and challenges. Transp Res Procedia 25:888–899 Rezaei J (2016) Best-worst multicriteria decision-making method: some properties and a linear model. Omega 126–130 Rezaei J (2015) Best-Worst multi-criteria decision-making method.

Omega 49–57 Ruescha M, Hegi P, Haefeli U, Matti D, Schultz B, Rütsche P (2012) Sustainable goods supply and transport in conurbations: freight strategies and guidelines. Procedia—Soc Behav Sci 39:116–133 Saaty R (1987) The analytic hierarchy process—what it is and how it is used. Math Model 9(3– 5):161–176 Saaty TL (1980) The analytic hierarchy process: Planning, priority setting, resource allocation. McGraw-Hill, New York Saaty TL (2008) Decision making with the analytic hierarchy process.

Int J Serv Sci 1(1) Saaty TL, Vargas LG (1991) Prediction, projection and forecasting. Kluwer Academic, Boston Schoner B, Wedley WC (1989) Ambiguous criteria weights in AHP: consequences and solutions. Decis Sci 20:462–475 Semih T, Seyhan S (2011) A multi-criteria factor evaluation model for gas station site selection. J Glob Manag 2(1):12–21 Serrai W, Abdelli A, Hammal LM (2017) Towards an efficient and more accurate web service selection using MCDM methods.

J Comput Sci 22 Sharma MJ, Moon I, Bae H (2008) Analytic hierarchy process to assess and optimise distribution network. Appl Math Comput 202:256–265 Sharma S, Shelton J, Warner GV (2017) Methodologies and models for selection of optimal truck freight management strategies. Transp Res Board (TRB) US-DOT (2013) Designing for transportation management and operations a primer. Washington, DC US DoT (2012) Assessing the effectiveness of transportation management plan (TMP) strategies.

Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC 20590 Velasque M, Hester PT (2013) An analysis of multi-criteria decision-making methods. Int J Oper Res 10(2):56–66 Visser J, Binsbergen AV, Nemoto T (1999) Urban freight transport policy and planning.

City Logist 39–70 Approaches, Challenges and Impacts of Asian Regional Multimodal Logistics for Supply Chain Integration and Interdependencies Michael Smith, Adam Voak, and Don Gunasekera Abstract Asia’s successful economic growth over the past few decades is well known and is receiving increasing attention from current and potential trading partners.

The region is home to some of the world’s largest emerging and dynamic economies, and this includes the 10 countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Along with this growth, there is a recognition that trade costs, along domestic and international supply chains in these Asian economies, can be significantly reduced by improving the logistics performance in each mode of transport involved in various logistics and supply chain transactions.

These improvements may be conveniently facilitated by the optimisation of the transitioning strategies from unimodal to multimodal (or combined) transport services. In this context, we examine here the status of current multimodal logistics in the provision of supply chain integration and interdependencies practiced in the key Asian economies.

For this chapter we have particularly focused on the current approaches, challenges and potential impacts of transforming and enhancing the levels of logistics and supply chain multimodal integration and interdependencies on the emerging economies of this region.

Keywords Multimodal logistics · Supply chain management · Integration · Supply chain interdependencies · ASEAN region M. Smith (B) · A. Voak · D. Gunasekera Deakin University, Melbourne, Australia e-mail: michael.smith1@deakin.edu.au A. Voak e-mail: adam.voak@deakin.edu.au D. Gunasekera e-mail: don.gunasekera@deakin.edu.au © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_11 165 166 M. Smith et al. 1 Introduction Within the current growth of the Asian economic sphere, there has arisen an everincreasing demand for end-to-end handling of multimodal cargo which has driven the growth of multimodal logistics and supply chain management services.

A wellintegrated and sustainable multimodal process and handling system is an imperative for these Asian economies, particularly those within the ASEAN block of nations. For ASEAN to take full advantage of the emerging regional economic development opportunities and for capturing further regional trade growth, it needs to become cognisant of the conceptual nature of supply chain integration and global competitiveness.

Such a realisation will enable it to leverage its location at the cross roads of Northeast Asia, South Asia and Oceania and to further bolster its growing strategic significance in the region. It is important to comment here that, from the point of view of logistics and supply chain management, accessibility and efficiency become key decision-making considerations when utilising multimodal logistics and supply chain services.

In this respect, it is the reliability and security of the service provision, together with an acute understanding of transit times and cost, that play an essential factor in informing the level of multimodal efficiency, the extent of seamless integration achievable and the completeness of the unified interdependencies of the service offerings.

We assert that improving and maintaining the quality of relevant, reliable and efficient multimodal logistics services throughout the supply chain, is extremely important for multimodal integration and improved supply chain performance. This is especially so for economies transitioning from mainly unimodal and intermodal operations towards integrated, interdependent and more sophisticated multimodal transport contracts.

The current absence of consolidated regulatory frameworks within the ASEAN region, along with the somewhat incongruent accreditation systems for Multimodal Transport Operators (MTOs), presents a clear problem. This barrier, together with a shortage of the required human resource skills and capabilities, could combine to hinder the successful transition to multimodal transport integration and greater supply chain connectivity.

Our overall research intention is to contribute to the more efficient and effective utilisation of Asian regional multimodal logistics and supply chain integration, and to inform key players and stakeholders. This could be done through better understanding of those interdependencies along and within supply chains that are often neglected in broader systems-thinking discussions.

To this end, this chapter focuses on a review of current approaches, challenges and impacts associated with evaluating the role played by regional multimodal transport, logistics and supply chain integration and their resultant interdependencies within ASEAN.

Analysis was based on the research findings and investigation of a series of in-country missions to each of the 10 ASEAN contributing nations to assess their progress and development in the implementation of multimodal transport and logistics.

The outcome resulted in the development and full adoption by these countries of an agreed implementation framework for the realisation of the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Multimodal Approaches, Challenges and Impacts of Asian Regional Multimodal … 167 Transport (AFAMT) 2020–2025.

It is noted that this implementation framework details a comprehensive suite of strategies and deployment guidelines, including a description of the regional action plans, which chart out, in detail, the key activities, implementation mechanisms, recommended measures, timeline and actions required for strengthening the regional approach for the realisation and implementation of the AFAMT.

2 Other Studies on Multimodal Integration and Connectivity The concept of integration and connectivity between trading economies have often been studied through the lens of single modality (Arvis and Shepherd 2016), as well as between modes within a single economy (Shepherd et al. 2011). While a number of multimodal connectivity assessments have been undertaken in relation to passenger transport (Litman 2017; OECD 2016; Krul et al. 2010), similar freightbased studies are not common.

The Asia–Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) completed a detailed study on the economic impact of multimodal connectivity in the APEC region in 2010 which revealed, for each of the 19 countries analysed, the changes from 2005 to 2010. In addition, the relative position with regard to maritime, air and land transport, logistic competence and an aggregated multimodal transport indicator was presented.

In addition, the correlation between exports and multimodal transport performance has been estimated using the Gravity Model of Bilateral Trade (Shepherd et al. 2011). It is appreciated that the importance of engagement with intermediaries has long been recognised in both empirical (Grubel and Lloyd 1975) and theoretical (Batra and Casas 1973; Woodland 1977) studies.

More recently, whilst these interrelationships have increased in importance, they are, however, being represented and becoming manifested in new phrases, terms and descriptive terminology (Hummels et al. 2001; Kohler 2004; Antras et al. 2006; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg 2008; Koopman et al. 2010; Johnson and Noguera 2012). Moreover, it is becoming glaringly obvious that the supply-chain trade concerns goods that will be inputs into production processes in other nations.

In this respect, missing information in the chain regarding the ‘next step’ in each part or segment of the supply chain is becoming a central problem to production. Further, it is the lack of visibility within the ‘next step’ along supply chains that leads to uncertainty and ambiguity around global patterns of cross-border multimodal transport freight data (in terms of volume and value), as data collection becomes increasingly more complex. Zhao et al.

(2019), postulate that many firms in a traditional supply chain setting constitute self-organizing networks, and, as a result, these supply chains can be innately adaptive or resilient in the face of external perturbation. However, due to the complexity, uncertainty of supply and interdependence in more globalised supply chains, there is an increased risk of loss of continuity in these more finely balanced 168 M. Smith et al. networks due to an interceding disruption event (Bode et al.

2011; Bode and Wagner 2015; Kamalahmadi and Parast 2016; Scheibe and Blackhurst (2018) contend that emerging new supply chain trends built around stringent efficiency demands, such as Just-In-Time (JIT) operations, can significantly increase the need for coupling and interdependence between entities within the structures. De Sá et al.

(2019), also conclude that, in this environment, there are distinct managerial and social implications, especially around the interdependence of a firm’s robustness and overall supply chain resilience.

Nye (2020), commenting on power relationships in supply chains, also believes a situation in which interdependence exists without asymmetry of control generates little power imbalance, but when a discrepancy of control exists, interdependence within the chain creates situations that can be used to one party’s advantage in strategic competitive systems. In this respect, Michalski et al.

(2019) observed that the level of trust and innovation developed in symmetric relationships differs markedly from that in asymmetric situations with respect to organizational performance.

It is suggested that the growth of ‘deep dependence’ comes from a Principal-and-Agent type of relationship based upon asymmetric knowledge, whilst ‘deep interdependence’ suggests a wider-ranging relationship between equal partners, which is manifested in a symmetrical unity and greater mutual reliance (Deif and Mohib 2019).

However, what is generally poorly understood, is the extent of the lack of general understanding regarding the level of complexity and attendant interdependencies within supply chains. These arise from an array of multifaceted issues which are essential to integrated multimodal transport and logistics services across borders.

These intricacies and characteristics of modern supply chains are particularly evident in the interdependence and organisation of supply-and-demand processes in a global market. This complexity is manifested through a multitude of factors including raw material forecasting, asset investment, risk management and response to change.

Successful supply chain enterprises must place a greater focus on a systems-thinking approach in order to better understand the increasingly complex nature of global supply chains.

For example, supply chain professionals need to understand and appreciate the interdependent and interconnected system of labour, energy sources, transport and logistics operations, finance, business processes, service expectations, information technology, sourcing and procurement, commercial power, legal and regulatory frameworks and strategic asset investment.

Added to this impressive list of requirements, we note that with cross-border supply chains, there are subtle barriers related to cross-cultural issues and competing political stances. As we have intimated earlier, the term ‘global supply chain’ is not a simple extension of a national supply chain.

Approaches, Challenges and Impacts of Asian Regional Multimodal … 169 3 Challenges Facing ASEAN Supply Chain Development Given the dynamic environment in which ASEAN connectivity is now taking place, it is crucial to consider the forecasted emerging trends that are likely to influence the successful implementation of the ‘Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025’ (‘MPAC 2025’).

However, since the formal adoption of MPAC, it is clear that many challenges still face the 10 member nations, with much more needing to be done to realise the MPAC vision in achieving cross-border seamless logistics connectivity.

Particular areas that will need to be addressed include the introduction of hard and soft infrastructure, the development of the various logistics service sectors, relevant education and skills programs, together with the challenges relating to the mobility of skilled labour, cross-border regulatory standards and multimodal transport and logistics connectivity.

In this regard, there are particular ASEAN issues which we see as needing to be addressed before more systematic conjoint connectivity initiatives might be introduced. As a consequence, we note that there are words and concepts, which are essential to an understanding of the complexities of this area that are being continually introduced and, even more importantly, which are being modified as conditions and situations change.

It is these to notions, and their introduction, to which we now turn our research attention.

4 Methodology The key purposes of this study were to (i) identify core ASEAN values, objectives and plans with regard to national and international transportation, logistics and connectivity strategies, (ii) assess the strengths, opportunities, weaknesses and related threats apparent within those logistical networks that potentially affect progress toward broader ASEAN goals, (iii) identify infrastructure deficiencies in the logistics environment of the ASEAN region, (iv) determine policy deficiencies which may impede economic growth and development, and (v) offer policy recommendations that may contribute toward achieving MPAC 2025’s objectives by improving, expanding, or otherwise enhancing logistics infrastructure within the ASEAN region.

In order to meet these research aims, it was necessary to determine the current status of understanding and practice of multimodal logistics strategies related to the provision of supply chain integration and organisation of interdependencies common to the ASEAN economies.

In order to achieve this, we needed to focus our research on establishing the perceived efficacy of current approaches, challenges and potential impacts of transforming and enhancing the levels of logistics and supply chain multimodal integration and interdependencies amongst key functionaries in the area. This level of understanding is clearly time and place dependent, thus we employed a qualitative data collection and analysis methodology.

Primary data sources consisted of a collection of statements and perceptions provided by a purposively selected range of supply chain professionals and government officials. To facilitate this data 170 M. Smith et al.

collection, a series of meetings in each ASEAN country was organised under the auspices of the ASEAN Regional Integration Support, using an opportunity which arose from the EU ARISE Plus program ‘Supporting the Implementation of the ASEAN Framework Agreement on the Facilitation of Multimodal Transport’.

These meetings, which were for invited delegates, included open and frank discussions with concerned government agencies including National Ministries of Transport and other relevant groups related to membership of the ASEAN National Transit Transport Coordinating Committee (NTTCC).

The investigation was conducted with the support and guidance of the ASEAN Secretariat based in Jakarta (Indonesia), the ASEAN Transit Transport Coordinating Board (TTCB), the ASEAN Transport Facilitation Working Group (TFWG) and ARISE Plus. This primary data was collected directly by the researchers, with permission from the organising committee, and all comments were de-identified before analysis to protect the positions of the delegates.

To provide a sound background for the investigation, secondary qualitative and descriptive quantitative data were retrieved electronically from relevant governmental, intergovernmental, academic, trade and industry sources. In addition, a detailed literature review was carried out in order to compare ASEAN objectives and plans with existing conditions, to gain a sense of how successful existing plans have been.

It is acknowledged here that our research findings have been advised by the 2019 technical assistance project related to the ASEAN Framework Agreement on Multimodal Transport (AFAMT). 5 Results It was found that the most urgent matter that needed to be addressed by ASEAN member nations is the matter of intra-regional connectivity. It was noted that transportation and communications networks which serve as a conduit for the robust free trade that the union hopes to generate are currently below par.

In this respect, Blyde and Molina (2015) have reported that the quality of logistics infrastructure impacts on the level of foreign direct investment, and it is also apparent that currently, infrastructure quality in eight of the 10 ASEAN states (excluding Singapore and Malaysia) lag behind the global average quality, which is seen to drag down regional economic productivity. Further, poorly constructed and managed transportation networks are found to act as trade barriers.

Transportation safety and security are seen as major concerns that require immediate attention, and disparate customs policies across the region were found to increase time and cost in the import/export process. As part of the new open-border agenda, ASEAN members have been urged to harmonize their customs procedures, reduce documentation requirements, and allow for electronic processing of shipments.

Our research has indicated that increased intergovernmental cooperation is desperately required to provide adequate security and safety compliance in shipping industries around the region. Infrastructure investment opportunities were found to be in abundance, but investment policies need to be amended to attract Approaches, Challenges and Impacts of Asian Regional Multimodal … 171 further foreign investors.

Another strong recommendation in this regard includes the establishment of a regional consumer credit rating bureau. 6 Discussion There is little disagreement that infrastructure clearly continues to play a big role in assuring basic connectivity and access to gateways for most developing countries.

In all income groups, survey respondents reported that infrastructure was improving, but it was indicated that in all ASEAN countries except Singapore and Malaysia, the scores for infrastructure were lower than the overall scores. The introduction of better logistics connectivity, not only within each ASEAN member nations but between countries in ASEAN, will boost the region’s value chain and economy.

However, there are, in fact, a number of deep-seated problems that we see on the horizon for the logistics and supply chain industry that could hinder the future growth of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC). The largest economy in the AEC (Indonesia) spends 26% of its GDP on logistics, one of the highest rates of spending on logistics per capita in the world.

In the meantime, there are major commodity price gaps between provinces in Indonesia a well as major logistics inefficiencies that hamper economic development and connectivity. In a similar way, Thailand, despite offering easy access to Cambodia, Vietnam and the Lao PDR, still spends almost 20% of its GDP on logistics.

Limited facilities at ASEAN ports make congestion problems worse, but the greatest challenge is the reducing the cost of getting products from manufacturers to consumers, and addressing the problem of why land transport through ASEAN areas actually takes up more time than processing in the ports.

Inadequate roads because long transport times since rural roads are often closed for maintenance, and poorly maintained open roads can only be used by small vehicles, a restriction which implies high operating costs and which urgently needs to be redressed. Rail and air cargo networks are also inadequate in many ASEAN nations, with more on-dock rail facilities needed throughout Vietnam and the Philippines.

If these problems are not addressed, it is likely that China will step in to fill the infrastructure void, thus influencing and accelerating its own transport development across Asia to the detriment of ASEAN. In the logistics and supply chain sector, transport is the central issue determining performance, but there are still many companies that do not think seriously about integrated multimodal logistics and supply chain management.

For example, many small manufacturers still use containers only for loading and unloading in ports, rather than at the origin and destination of their cargo. Highly fragmented supply and demand scenarios for road transport services means that truckers frequently return home empty, which incurs costs and erodes margins. In Indonesia, for example, trucking accounts for 72% of transport costs, and yet trucks are only half full most of the time.

At a time of great change in the logistics sector, ASEAN governments have indeed started to focus on policy development and have ramped up investment 172 M. Smith et al. in an effort to revamp long-neglected infrastructure. However, by itself, this action will not help the ASEAN countries to improve their performance and boost trade growth and competitiveness.

In Indonesia, Thailand and several other AMS, there is an urgent need to reform the management of human resources and the adoption of new technologies to support more efficient and effective multimodal logistics and supply chain systems. 7 Conclusion Emerging from this work is support for the notion that successful modern multimodal logistics development and supply chain integration can be summarised as ‘one network, one contract, and one set of standards.

‘One network’ stresses the importance of an integrated transport infrastructure network conducive to convenient, reliable, low-cost logistics services. ‘One contract’ is the result of an open, collaborative and orderly freight market. ‘One set of standards’ provides unambiguous operating rules and performance appraisal across all national jurisdictions.

However, at present, it is perceived that the ASEAN multimodal market is largely fragmented and disorganised, with different government agencies remaining divided in their approaches. Currently, the lack of modern unified and, mutually agreed specifications and standards has led to high logistics costs, holding back ASEAN’s multimodal logistics development and integration.

These are key issues in the development of ASEAN’s regional logistics and supply chain connectivity agenda and this hiatus should be the main focus of future policy reforms. It is widely recognised that efficient multimodal transport is an essential part of the ASEAN connectivity agenda.

In this respect, the AFAMT framework provides a suitable policy tool for a systems approach to integrate the different transport modes into one coherent transport system which caters for the needs of ASEAN Member State governments and industry. However, this research has identified that whilst the desire to reach uniformity of the laws governing multimodal transport is recognised to be viable, much work remains to make their introduction a reality.

In this light, the challenge now, for ASEAN and Member States, is to adopt the action plan presented by the AFAMT framework to meet the milestone aspirations of the Kuala Lumpur Transport Strategic Plan 2016–2025 and to realise the AFAMT aims in the spirit of the agreement signed in 2005. This will require the willingness and co-operation of Member State governments, industry peak bodies and transport service providers and operators.

Finally, given the obvious growth of the logistics industry and the significant changes it is undergoing, there is a need to review the methodology for assessing the economic value of multimodal logistics and supply chain integration to the ASEAN regional economy, and we believe any detected shortcomings would be largely addressed by the development of a customised version of an economy-wide Approaches, Challenges and Impacts of Asian Regional Multimodal … 173 Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model, emphasising supply chain and logistics activities in ASEAN.

Our aim is to stimulate further research into the way multimodal logistics for supply chain integration and interdependencies has transformed the nature and impacts of ASEAN regional supply chains. The importance of this topic has, to date, been overlooked. Acknowledgments This study was funded by the ASEAN Regional Integration Support from the European Union ARISE Plus program, which provides technical support for ASEAN economic integration.

We wish to thank ARISE Plus for giving permission to use the work funded by them to be used in this paper. We also thank the ASEAN participants who were involved in the in conduct of the research, and ensure them of their anonymity. References Antras PL, Garicano E, Rossi-Hansberg E (2006) Offshoring in a knowledge economy. Quart J Econ 121(1):31–77 Arvis J, Shepherd B (2016) Measuring connectivity in a globally networked industry: the case of air transport.

the World Economy 39(11):369–385 Batra R, Casas F (1973) Intermediate products and the pure theory of international trade: a NeoHecksher-Ohlin framework. Am Econ Rev 63(3):279–311 Blyde J, Molina D (2015) Logistic infrastructure and the international location of fragmented production. J Int Econ 95(2):319–332 Bode C, Wagner S (2015) Structural drivers of upstream supply chain complexity and the frequency of supply chain disruptions.

J Oper Manag 36:215–228 Bode C, Wagner S, Petersen K, Ellram J (2011) Understanding responses to supply chain disruptions: insights from information processing and resource dependence perspectives. Acad Manag J 54(4):833–856 De Sá MM, Miguel P, Brito R, Pereira S (2019) Supply chain resilience: the whole is not the sum of the parts. Int J Oper Prod Manag 40(1):92–115 Deif A, Mohib A (2019) A Typology to understand some dynamics of supply chain innovation location.

J Supply Chain Oper Manag 17(1):47–55 Grossman G, Rossie-Hansberg E (2008) Trading tasks: a simple theory of offshoring. Am Econ Rev 98(5):1978–1997 Grubel H, Loyd P (1975) Intra-industry trade: the theory and measurement of international trade in differentiated products. Econ J 85(339):646–648 Hummels D, Ishii J, Yi K (2001) The nature and growth of vertical specialization in world trade. J Int Econ 54(1):75–96 Johnson R, Noguera G (2012) Proximity and production fragmentation.

Am Econ Rev 102(3):407– 411 Kamalahmadi M, Parast M (2016) A review of the literature on the principles of enterprise and supply chain resilience: major findings and directions for future research. Int J Prod Res 171:116–133 Kohler W (2004) Aspects of international fragmentation. Rev Int Econ 12(5):793–816 Koopman R, Powers W, Wang Z, Wei S-J (2010) Give credit where credit is due: tracing value added in global production chains. National Bureau of Economic Research.

In working paper 16426, Cambridge, MA Krul B, Kaikai S, Sheran R (2010) Hill uptown Oakland multimodal connectivity assessment. In: Report submitted to Oakland Planning and Development Corporation (OPDC), Pittsburgh, PA Litman T (2017) Introduction to multi-modal transportation planning: principles and practices. Victoria Transport Policy Institute, Victoria, BC, V8V 3R7, Canada 174 M. Smith et al.

Michalski M, Montes J, Naramsimhan R (2019) Relational asymmetry, trust, and innovation in supply chain management: a non-linear approach. Int J Logist Manag 30(1):303–328 Nye J (2020) Power and interdependence with China. Washington Quart 43(1):7–21 OECD (2016) Intermodal connectivity for destinations.

A policy paper prepared by the OECD Centre for Entrepreneurship, SMEs and Local Development, as part of the Tourism Committee’s Programme of Work for 2015–2016, Paris Scheibe K, Blackhurst J (2018) Supply chain disruption propagation: a systemic risk and normal accident theory perspective. Int J Prod Res 56(1–2):43–59 Shepherd B, Serafica R, Bayhaqi A, Jing H (2011) The trade impact of enhanced multimodal connectivity in the Asia-Pacific region.

J Econ Integr 26(4):624–650 Woodland A (1977) Joint Outputs, intermediate inputs and international trade theory. Int Econ Rev 18(3):517–533 Zhao K, Zuo Z, Blackhurst J (2019) Modelling supply chain adaptation for disruptions: an empirically grounded complex adaptive systems approach.

J Oper Manag 65(2):190–212 Electric Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows and Cargo Weight Sina Rastani, Tuğçe Yüksel, and Bülent Çatay Abstract There is growing interest in the utilization of electric vehicles (EVs) in logistics operations as they can cut dependency on fossil fuels, hence, significantly contribute to the efforts on reducing carbon emissions and air pollution.

However, their limited driving range still remains as a major barrier in their adoption despite the advancements in battery technology. In this study, we extend the well-known Electric Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows by taking into account the cargo weight, which may play a crucial role in the operational efficiency of the EVs since it can affect the energy consumption significantly.

We present the mixedinteger linear programming formulation of the problem and perform an extensive experimental study to investigate the influence of load on the routing decisions. We solve small-size instances using a commercial solver, and for the large-size instances, we develop a Large Neighbourhood Search algorithm. The results show that cargo weight may create substantial changes in the route plans and fleet size.

Keywords Vehicle routing · Electric vehicles · Time windows · Load · Energy consumption S. Rastani (B) · T. Yüksel · B. Çatay Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey e-mail: srastani@sabanciuniv.edu T. Yüksel e-mail: tugce.yuksel@sabanciuniv.edu B. Çatay e-mail: bulent.catay@sabanciuniv.edu Smart Mobility and Logistics Lab, Sabanci University, Istanbul, Turkey © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_12 175 176 S. Rastani et al. 1 Introduction Electric vehicles (EVs) have recently attracted great attention in transportation and logistics sector as they considerably reduce dependency to oil and consequently air pollution.

The EVs are more efficient than conventional vehicles due to their electric motor and transmission system which transfers mechanical power to the wheels (Wu et al. 2015). Nevertheless, there are some technical drawbacks in case of using EVs. The most significant drawback is their battery capacity, which is low, and users should charge their batteries frequently in order to reach their destinations.

Due to this restriction, routing an EV fleet has appeared as a challenging combinatorial optimization problem in the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) literature. Electric Vehicle Routing Problem (EVRP) is an extension for VRP, where EVs are used in the fleet instead of fossil fuel vehicles. EVs reduce tailpipe emission and enhance green logistics.

It tries to handle distribution tasks of logistics companies by minimizing the total energy consumption cost of serving customers and satisfying their demands. EVRP with Time Window (EVRPTW) is introduced by Schneider et al. (2014) where a full-recharge strategy was adopted. The authors developed the mathematical programming formulation of the problem and proposed a hybrid Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS) and Tabu Search (TS) algorithm to solve it.

Different variants of EVRP and EVRPTW were addressed in several studies including the cases of partial recharge (Bruglieri et al. 2015; Keskin and Çatay 2016), mixed fleet (Goeke and Schneider 2015; Hiermann et al. 2016), location routing (Schiffer and Walther 2017), fast charging (Felipe et al. 2014; Çatay and Keskin 2017; Keskin and Çatay 2018), non-linear charging function (Montoya et al. 2017; Froger et al. 2019), battery swapping (Yang and Sun 2015; Hof et al. 2017; Paz et al. 2018).

Desaulniers et al. (2016) also studied EVRPTW and proposed a branch-price-andcut algorithm to solve four different recharging strategies. Some recent studies have dealt with the availability of recharging stations and queueing for recharging service (Froger et al. 2017; Kullman et al. 2018; Keskin et al. 2019). A comprehensive review of the EV technology and survey of the EVRP variants may be found in (Pelletier et al. 2016; Pelletier et al. 2017; Erdelić and Carić 2019).

Energy consumption on the road does not only depend on the distance travelled but many other factors including the vehicle’s weight, velocity, auxiliary equipment (internal factors) as well as ambient temperature and road gradient (external factors). These factors have been often neglected in the VRP literature either because they make the problem too complex to solve or the driving range is not an issue as the vehicles can easily refuel at a nearby gas station.

However, they may play a critical for in the operational efficiency of the EVs since they can increase their energy consumption significantly (Rastani et al. 2019). Among them, the weight of the transported cargo may play a crucial role in route planning.

The logistics operations of hypermarkets, hardware stores and other companies that deal with heavy loads are examples for which a load-dependent model produces more efficient transportation plans in comparison with basic routing models (Zachariadis et al. 2015), which constitutes the main motivation of this study. Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 177 Load Dependent Vehicle Routing Problem (LDVRP) was introduced in (Kara et al. 2007).

They used the weighted distance objective and relate it with the energy requirements of vehicles. They proposed mathematical formulations for collection and distribution cases. Xiao et al. (2012) attacked the same problem by emphasizing the relation of the weighted distance with the fuel consumption of the vehicles within the context of Fuel Capacitated VRP. Zachariadis et al.

(2015) extended LDVRP by considering simultaneous pick-ups and deliveries and proposed a local-search algorithm to solve large-scale instances. In this study, we address the load-dependent variant of EVRPTW with partial recharges by taking into account the energy consumption associated with the cargo carried on the vehicle. We adopt a hierarchical objective function where the primary objective is to minimize the fleet size whereas the secondary objective is to minimize total energy consumption.

We solve small-size instances using a commercial solver, and for the large-size instances, we develop a Large Neighbourhood Search (LNS) algorithm. The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows: Sect. 2 introduces the problem and formulates its mathematical programming model. Section 3 describes the proposed LNS method. Section 4 presents the experimental study and discusses the results. Finally, concluding remarks are provided in Sect. 5.

2 Problem Description and Mathematical Model We tackle EVRPTW where a homogeneous fleet of EVs serve a set of customers with known demands, time windows, and service times. As opposed to previous studies in the literature which assume that the energy on the battery is consumed proportional to the distance traveled, we take into account the additional energy consumption related to freight load. Carrying more load by an EV causes more energy consumption.

Furthermore, we allow partial recharging and its duration depends on the amount of energy transferred. Since it is a common practice in the real world to operate within the first phase of recharging where the energy transferred is a linear function of the recharge duration in order to prolong the battery life (Pelletier et al. 2017), we also assume a linear charging function.

In addition, we assume that the EV can be recharged at most once between two consecutive customers, which is practical in last-mile logistics. We consider a pick-up problem where the load of the EV increases along its tour as it visits the customers. Each EV departs from the depot with full battery since it can be recharged overnight. 2.1 Mathematical Formulation In line with the mathematical notation and modelling convention in the literature (Schneider et al.

2014; Keskin and Çatay 2016; Rastani et al. 2019) we define V = {1, …, n} as the set of customers and F as the set of recharging stations. Vertices 0 178 S. Rastani et al. and n + 1 denote the depot where each vehicle departs from 0 (departure depot) and returns to n + 1 (arrival depot) at the end of its tour. We define V 0 = V ∪ {0}, V n + 1 = V ∪ {n + 1} and V 0, n + 1 = V ∪ {0, n + 1}.

Then, the problem can be represented on a complete directed graph G = (N, A) with the set of arcs, A = {(i, j) | i, j ∈ N, i = j} where N = V 0, n + 1 ∪ F is the total set of nodes on the network. The energy consumption depends on the distance traveled and the total weight of the EV, which is affected by the cargo load carried on the EV. Each customer i ∈ V has a positive demand qi , service time si , and time window [ei , l i ]. All EVs have a cargo capacity of C and a battery capacity of Q.

At each recharging station, one unit of energy is transferred in g time units. The direct distance from node i to j is represented by d ij .

Travel time from customer i to customer j is denoted by t i j if the journey is direct and t̂ ijs = t is + t sj – t ij is the additional travel time if it is via station s. Note that t̂ ijs does not include the recharging time at station s. The amount of extra energy needed in order to move one unit of cargo is represented by w. The total energy consumption starting from customer i to customer j is calculated as (h + wui )d ij , where ui is the weight of the load on the vehicle upon departure from customer i.

The decision variables (yk i , yk ijs , and Y k ijs ), keep track of battery SoC of vehicle k at arrival at customer/depot i, at arrival at station s on route (i, s, j), and at departure from station s on route (i, s, j), respectively. τ i denotes the time when the loading starts at customer i.

The binary decision variable xijk takes value 1 if vehicle k travels k takes from node i to node j, and 0 otherwise whereas the binary decision variable zijs value 1 if vehicle k traverses arc (i, j), through station s. Minimize  k (y0k − yn+1 )+ k∈K    (Yikjs − yikjs ) (1) i∈V0 j∈Vn+1 k∈K s∈F subject to y0k = Q ∀k ∈ K   (2) xikj = 1 ∀i ∈ V (3) x kji = 0 ∀ j ∈ V, k ∈ K (4) j∈Vn+1 k∈K i= j  xikj − i∈V0 i= j   i∈Vn+1 i= j z ikjs ≤ xikj ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , k ∈ K , i = j s∈F τi + (ti j + ri )xikj +  (5) (tˆi js z ikjs + g(Yikjs − yikjs )) − l0 (1 − xikj ) ≤ τ j s∈F ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , k ∈ K , i = j (6) Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 179 ej ≤ τj ≤ lj ∀ j ∈ N 0 ≤ y kj ≤ yik − (h + wu i )di j + M(1 − xikj + (7)  z ikjs ) s∈F ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , k ∈ K , i = j (8) y kj ≤ Yikjs − (h + wu i )ds j + M(1 − z ikjs ) ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , s ∈ F, k ∈ K , i = j (9) 0 ≤ yikjs ≤ yik − (h + wu i )dis + M(1 − z ikjs ) ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , s ∈ F, k ∈ K , i = j yikjs ≤ Yikjs ≤ Qz ikjs ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , s ∈ F, k ∈ K , i = j y kj ≤ Q  xikj ∀ j ∈ Vn+1 , k ∈ K (10) (11) (12) i∈V0 u j ≥ ui + q j  xikj − C(1 − k∈K  xikj ) k∈K ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , i = j 0 ≤ ui ≤ c xikj ∈ {0, 1} xikjs ∈ {0, 1} (13) ∀i ∈ V0,n+1 (14) ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , k ∈ K (15) ∀i ∈ V0 , j ∈ Vn+1 , s ∈ F, k ∈ K (16) The objective function (1) minimizes the total energy consumption.

Constraints (2) set the initial battery SoC of EVs at departure to full. The connectivity of customer visits is imposed by constraints (3) whereas the flow conservation at each vertex is ensured by constraints (4). Constraints (5) make sure that vehicle k serves customer j after customer i if it travels from i to j by recharging its battery en-route. Constraints (6) guarantee the time feasibility of arcs emanating from the customers (the depot).

Constraints (7) establish the service time windows restriction. Constraints (6) and (7) also eliminate the formation of sub-tours. Constraints (8)–(11) keep track of the battery SoC at each node and make sure that it never falls below zero where M = Q + (h + w. i ∈V qi ).max{d ij }. Constraints (8) establish the battery SoC consistency if the vehicle travels from customer i to customer j without recharging en-route.

Constraints (9) determine battery SoC at the arrival at customer j if the vehicle 180 S. Rastani et al. visits a recharging station after it has departed from customer i whereas constraints (10) check battery SoC at the arrival at a station if the battery is recharged en-route. Constraints (11) set the limits for battery SoC when the vehicle departs from a station. Constraints (12) allow positive battery SoC at the arrival of an EV at customer j only if that EV serves customer j.

Constraints (13) keep track of the load of the vehicle throughout its journey. Constraints (14) ensure the non-negativity of the load on the vehicle and guarantee that the cargo capacity is not exceeded. Finally, constraints (15) and (16) define the binary decision variables. 2.2 Energy Consumption Function The energy consumption of an EV that travels from one node to another depends on various factors such as its mass, shape, road gradient, acceleration, etc.

By using tractive power requirements placed on the vehicle at the wheels, the power demand of a vehicle can be obtained using function (18) (Demir et al.

2012): F = Ma + Mg sin θ + 0.5Ca ρ AV 2 + MgCr cos θ (17) Ptract (kW ) = Fv/1000 (18) where F shows the force function as calculated in (17), M is the total weight of the vehicle that consist of its curb weight and the cargo load (kg), a is the acceleration (m/s2 ), g is the gravitational constant, θ is road gradient, C d is the coefficient of aerodynamic drag, ρ is the air density in (kg/m3 ), A is the frontal area, v is the speed (m/s), and C r the coefficient of rolling resistance.

The tractive power requirement can be converted to second-by-second engine power output (kW) as follows: P = Ptract /μt f + Pacc (19) where the vehicle’s drive train efficiency is shown by μtf and Pacc is the power demand associated with the accessory equipment such as air conditioning, audio system and cabin lights, which is neglected in this study. Then, the energy consumption in (kWh/km) can be calculated as follows: E = P/v.

(20) Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 181 3 Solution Methodology We attempt to solve small-size instances using a commercial solver. To solve the large-size instances, we develop an LNS method. LNS was introduced by Shaw (1998) and aims at improving an initial solution by using several destroy and repair mechanisms iteratively. In each iteration, some customers are removed from the solution and reinserted into the routes to create a new feasible solution.

This procedure is repeated for a predetermined number of iterations. LNS and Adaptive LNS (ALNS) have been successfully applied to many VRP variants including EVRPs and EVRPTWs (Keskin and Çatay 2016, 2018; Goeke and Schneider 2015; Hiermann et al. 2016; Schiffer and Walther 2017; Keskin et al. 2019; Wen et al. 2016; Schiffer et al. 2018).

We create the initial solution using the insertion heuristic in (Keskin and Çatay 2016) where the cost of inserting a customer into a route is calculated as (h + wui )d ik + (h + wuk )d kj – (h + wui )d ij . This insertion cost is calculated for all unvisited customers and the minimum cost insertion is performed by ensuring that the related constraints are not violated. If an EV runs out energy, a station may be inserted to make its tour energy feasible.

We use First-Feasible Station Insertion algorithm which will be described in Sect. 3.3. If no customer can be feasibly inserted in the route, a new route is initialized, and the procedure is repeated until all customers are served. Our LNS consist of customer removal and insertion mechanisms. In each iteration, a customer removal algorithm is applied on a feasible solution to remove a subset of customers from the routes.

If any station is no longer needed in the partial solution, they are removed as well. Next, we apply a customer insertion algorithm that inserts all the customers removed to repair the solution in an attempt to obtain a new improved solution. Stations may be inserted to maintain the energy feasibility along the route. This procedure continues until the stopping criterion is satisfied, which is a limit on the number of iterations in our implementation.

Note that the set of stations that can be visited between any two customers is reduced by using the dominance rules presented in (Bruglieri et al. 2016). 3.1 Customer Removal Operators The current feasible solution is destroyed by removing γ customers. We use WorstConsumption, Random Worst-Consumption, Shaw, Random Worst-Time, Random, Random Route Removal and Greedy Route Removal procedures of Keskin and Çatay (2016) by modifying them for the load dependent problem.

The destroy operators are selected randomly. • Worst-Consumption algorithm selects the customers with high energy consumption imposed to the route by visiting that customer, which is calculated as (h + 182 S. Rastani et al. wui )d ik + (h + wuk )d kj – (h + wui )d ij that considers distance and cargo load effect in energy consumption.

• Random Worst-Consumption sorts the customers with respect to the associated energy consumptions, considers a subset of σ × γ customers with highest costs to select γ customers randomly and remove them. • Shaw Removal removes similar customers with respect to their energy consumption, earliest service time, being in the same route, and their demand.

It randomly selects customer i and calculates the relatedness measure as Ri j = φ 1 hi d i j + φ 2 |ei – ej | + φ 3 l ij + φ 4 |Di – Dj | to find similar customers j. φ 1 – φ 4 are the Shaw parameters, li j = –1 if i and j are in the same route, 1 otherwise. Small Ri j shows high similarity. So, using the non-decreasing order of the relatedness value with customer i, γ customers are removed from the solution.

• Random Worst-Time algorithm is a version of Shaw Removal where φ 1 , φ 3 , φ 4 are set equal to 0. The customers are sorted in the non-decreasing order of their relatedness values and γ customers are randomly removed from the subset of σ × γ customers with lowest relatedness values. • Random Removal mechanism randomly removes γ customers from the solution. • Random Route Removal algorithm randomly removes ω routes from the solution.

• Greedy Route Removal mechanism sorts the routes in the non-decreasing order of the number of customers visited and removes ω routes which serve the least number of customers. Note that the Route Removal algorithms attempt to reduce the fleet size. 3.2 Customer Insertion Operators We adapt Random Greedy, Regret-2, Random Time-Based, Random Greedy with Noise Function, and Regret-2 with Noise Function repair algorithms in (Keskin and Çatay 2016; Demir et al. 2012) for our load-dependent case.

In addition, we propose Exhaustive Greedy, Exhaustive Time-Based, Exhaustive Time-Based with Noise Function, and Random Time-Based with Noise Function mechanisms. The repair operators are selected randomly. • Random Greedy Insertion selects a customer and inserts it in the best position which leads to least increase of energy consumption. • Regret-2 Insertion try to avoid the higher costs in the subsequent iteration.

It calculates the difference between the cost of the best insertion and the second-best insertion for all customers and selects the customer with the highest difference. • Random Time-Based Insertion calculates insertion costs similar to the Exhaustive Time-Based algorithm, however, at first an unassigned customer is selected randomly, and the algorithm inserts it in its best position.

• Random Greedy Insertion with Noise Function is an extension of the Random Greedy Insertion mechanism with a degree of freedom. We use the same noise Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 183 function presented in (Demir et al. 2012). The cost of insertion using the freedom degree is calculated as N ewCost = ActualCost + d̄μ , where d̄ represents the maximum distance in the network, the noise parameter used for diversification is shown by μ, and is a random number between [–1, 1].

• Exhaustive Greedy Insertion considers all possible insertion positions for all notinserted customers and selects the customer-position matching which leads to least increase of energy consumption. • Exhaustive Time-Based Insertion calculates the difference between the route duration after and before inserting a customer as the insertion cost. For all customers, the insertion costs in all possible positions are calculated and the customer with least insertion cost is selected.

Note that Regret-2 with Noise Function, Exhaustive Time-Based with Noise Function, Random Time-Based with Noise Function are extensions of Regret-2, Exhaustive Time-Based and Random Time-Based insertion mechanisms, respectively, using a similar noise function. 3.3 Station Removal and Insertion Operators As we mentioned earlier, the unnecessary stations are removed from the partial solution obtained using the destroy operator.

During the repair procedure, the insertion of a customer may not be feasible with respect to battery SoC. In that case, we first attempt to increase the recharge quantity if a station is visited prior to arriving to that customer. If the energy recharged at the station cannot be increased or no station is visited en-route we apply a station insertion operator to make the insertion feasible.

We modified Best Station Insertion and Multiple Station Insertion operators from the literature (Keskin and Çatay 2016; Rastani et al. 2019) and applied them for the load dependent problem. Also, we develop First Feasible Station Insertion operator for this problem. Note that at most one station can be inserted between two consecutive customers in a route.

• First-Feasible Station Insertion considers the first customer (or depot) where the vehicle arrives at with negative SoC and checks the insertion of a station in the preceding arcs backwards. The first station which makes the problem feasible is inserted. • Best-Station Insertion algorithm checks all possible stations in all possible arcs before the first customer (or depot) with negative SoC and inserts the best station in its best position.

• Multiple-Station Insertion algorithm inserts multiple stations into a route when the insertion of a single station cannot make the route feasible. A station is inserted on the arc traversed immediately before arriving at the customer (or depot) with a negative SoC where the vehicle is recharged up to the maximum level allowed by the battery capacity and time windows restrictions of the succeeding customers.

If the SoC is still negative at that customer or if the vehicle runs out of energy before 184 S. Rastani et al. reaching the inserted station, we attempt to insert another station prior to the last customer visited before traveling to the recently inserted station. This procedure is repeated until the route becomes energy feasible. One of the First-Feasible Station Insertion and Best-Station Insertion algorithms is selected randomly.

If it does not make the route feasible, we resort to MultipleStation Insertion algorithm. Note that, we remove all stations in the solution after every β iterations and use Best-Station Insertion algorithm to insert stations to obtain an improved feasible solution. 4 Computational Study We performed our computational tests using the dataset of Schneider et al. (2014) and Desaulniers et al. (2016) for the small-size and large-size instances, respectively.

The small-size dataset consists of 36 instances involving 5, 10, and 15 customers, and the large-size dataset includes 56 instances generated based on the VRPTW instances of Solomon (1987). The instances are classified according to the geographic distribution of the customers: clustered (c-type), random (r-type), and half clustered half random (rc-type).

Furthermore, in type-1 problems (i.e., subsets r1, c1, rc1) the planning horizon is shorter, and customers’ time windows are narrower compared to type-2 problems (i.e., r2, c2, rc2). In our study, we only consider type-1 problems from the large-size dataset as they better exhibit the influence of recharging decisions on route planning (Keskin and Çatay 2016, 2018; Rastani et al. 2019).

In order to deal with realistic vehicle cargo capacity and customer demands, we assumed an electric truck based on the specifications provided in (Demir et al. 2012). Since capacity of this vehicle is 3650 kg, we converted the demand quantities to reasonable weights by multiplying each by (3650/original capacity) in order to observe the effect of cargo weight on energy consumption. We assumed a drive train efficiency of 0.9 as EVs are more efficient than internal combustion engine vehicles.

Furthermore, since the EVs in the original data are assumed to consume one unit of energy per unit distance/time travelled, we used Eq. (20) to calculate the actual energy consumption of an empty vehicle (i.e., 6350 kg) per unit distance and scaled it to h = 1. We used the same approach to determine the energy consumption w associated with unit load carried. We consider a flat network where road gradients are zero and we neglected vehicle acceleration.

The small-size instances were solved using Gurobi 9.0 with a 2-hour time limit. LNS was employed to solve both small- and large-size instances. LNS was coded in Python 3.7.1 and all runs were performed on an Intel Core (TM) i7-8700 processor with 3.20 GHz speed and 32 GB RAM. We performed five runs for each instance. The number of LNS iterations is set to 15,000 for the small-size instances and 25,000 for the large-size. The results for small-size instances are provided in Table 1.

Column “Gurobi” shows the results using Gurobi and “LNS” provides the results obtained by the Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 185 Table 1 Results of small-size instances obtained using Gurobi and LNS Instance Gurobi LNS Load independent Load dependent Load dependent Δ (%) #Veh EC t (s) #Veh EC t (s) #Veh EC t (s) r104c5-s3 2 137 <1 2 142 <1 2 142 11 0.00 r105c5-s3 2 156 <1 2 159 <1 2 159 8 0.00 r202c5-s3 1 129 <1 1 144 <1 1 144 16 0.00 r203c5-s4 1 179 <1 1 181 <1 1 181 9 0.00 c101c5-s3 2 258 <1 2 266 <1 2 266 9 0.00 c103c5-s2 1 175 <1 1 187 <1 1 187 10 0.00 c206c5-s4 1 243 <1 1 251 <1 1 251 10 0.00 c208c5-s3 1 164 <1 1 169 <1 1 169 9 0.00 rc105c5-s4 2 233 <1 2 257 <1 2 257 8 0.00 rc108c5-s4 2 254 <1 2 264 <1 2 264 10 0.00 rc204c5-s4 1 185 <1 1 189 <1 1 189 16 0.00 rc208c5-s3 1 168 <1 1 171 <1 1 171 14 0.00 r102c10-s4 3 249 <1 3 336 37 3 336 27 0.00 r103c10-s3 2 206 8 2 220 1507 2 220 29 0.00 r201c10-s4 1 242 <1 1 262 6 1 270 14 2.97 r203c10-s5 1 223 <1 1 227 7200 1 227 4 0.00 c101c10-s5 3 388 <1 3 410 117 3 410 23 0.00 c104c10-s4 2 274 <1 2 309 7200 2 308 48 – 0.26 c202c10-s5 1 304 <1 1 319 8 1 319 11 0.00 c205c10-s3 2 228 <1 2 234 148 2 234 26 0.00 rc102c10-s4 4 424 <1 5 475 435 5 475 17 0.00 rc108c10-s4 3 348 <1 3 365 4472 3 365 23 0.00 rc201c10-s4 1 413 <1 1 424 <1 2 327 28 − rc205c10-s4 2 326 <1 2 335 432 2 335 25 0.00 r102c15-s8 5 413 3 5 431 7200 5 431 28 0.00 r105c15-s6 4 336 2 4 350 7200 4 350 32 0.00 r202c15-s6 1 507 594 2 365 7200 2 365 30 0.00 r209c15-s5 1 313 11 1 362 7200 1 360 25 – 0.60 c103c15-s5 3 348 33 4 393 7200 3 402 73 − c106c15-s3 3 275 2 3 371 7200 3 352 52 – 5.27 c202c15-s5 2 384 11 2 408 7200 2 393 44 – 3.80 c208c15-s4 2 301 1 2 310 7200 2 310 47 0.00 rc103c15-s5 4 398 117 5 416 7200 4 416 45 − rc108c15-s5 3 370 2002 5 453 7200 3 418 40 − rc202c15-s5 2 394 1 2 403 7200 2 403 48 0.00 rc204c15-s7 1 382 7200 1 444 7200 1 446 9 0.45 186 S. Rastani et al.

proposed LNS algorithm. Column “Load Independent” reports the results for the case that does not consider the increased energy consumption associated with the cargo carried whereas column “Load Dependent” show the results for the case that considers the load on the vehicle. The comparison of these two columns exhibits the influence of the load on routing decisions. “#Veh”, “EC”, and “t” refer to the fleet size, energy consumption, and run time (in seconds), respectively.

The results show that #Veh increases by one in four instances and by two in one instance (shown in bold). Notice that these increases are very significant considering the size of the fleet. Furthermore, we observe that EC values obtained in the load-independent case are far from the actual energy consumption found by taking into account the cargo load.

Finally, we see that LNS finds (near-) optimal solutions in most of the instances while improving the solutions given by Gurobi in three instances with respect to #Veh and in four instances with respect to EC. We solved the large-size instances for both load-independent and load-dependent cases using LNS. The results are provided in Table 2. We observe that #Veh increases by one in fourteen instances (shown in bold) in the load-dependent case compared to the load-independent.

Furthermore, in the remaining 15 instances, EC increases by 14.3% on the average. These results show the importance of considering cargo weight in route optimization. 5 Conclusions and Future Research In this study, we addressed EVRPTW with partial recharge by taking into account the energy consumption associated with the cargo carried on the vehicle. We formulated its 0–1 mixed integer linear programming model and used it to solve small-size instances.

For solving the large-size instances, we proposed an LNS method. Our computational tests showed how the fleet size and/or energy consumption increase in comparison to the case where the load factor is neglected and revealed the importance of considering the weight of the vehicles for more accurate route planning. Future research on this topic may consider the road gradient as well. A loaded vehicle going uphill will consume significantly more energy.

On the other hand, when it travels downhill it can recharge its battery with energy recuperation.

Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 187 Table 2 Results of large-size instances obtained using LNS Instance Load independent Load dependent #Veh EC t (s) #Veh EC t (s) r101 19 1666 1397 19 1833 1323 r102 16 1491 1459 17 1746 1397 r103 14 1223 2365 14 1375 1910 r104 12 1115 3954 13 1253 2959 r105 15 1425 1460 16 1481 1690 r106 14 1298 2019 15 1469 2138 r107 12 1232 2482 13 1357 2211 r108 12 1082 3567 12 1190 3317 r109 14 1245 1952 14 1457 2188 r110 12 1151 3767 13 1256 3355 r111 12 1151 2749 13 1271 2955 r112 12 1091 4689 12 1204 3646 c101 12 1050 1740 12 1198 1460 c102 11 1206 2132 12 1210 1820 c103 11 1295 3231 11 1433 2418 c104 11 1049 5564 11 1456 3392 c105 11 1210 1696 12 1167 1829 c106 12 1034 2800 12 1171 3107 c107 12 1032 2860 12 1183 3116 c108 12 1087 3108 12 1215 3876 c109 11 1141 3905 12 1256 3987 rc101 17 1735 1785 17 1947 1612 rc102 15 1679 1911 16 1812 1653 rc103 14 1462 2363 14 1653 1985 rc104 12 1373 3547 13 1490 3340 rc105 15 1499 2151 15 1734 1712 rc106 14 1443 2331 15 1630 2136 rc107 13 1320 2924 13 1523 2339 rc108 12 1322 3730 13 1527 2634 Acknowledgments This study was partially supported by The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey through Grant #118M412.

188 S. Rastani et al. Appendix Parameters The parameters used in LNS algorithm are displayed in Table 3.

Table 3 Parameter values Param Description Value γ Number of customers removed Random between [20%, 55%] of all customers σ Parameter used in Random Worst-Consumption and Random Worst-Time algorithm 1.5 ω Number of routes removed Random between [10%, 40%] of all routes φ1 First Shaw parameter 0.5 φ2 Second Shaw parameter 0.25 φ3 Third Shaw parameter 0.15 φ4 Fourth Shaw parameter 0.25 μ Noise parameter 0.1 Random number for noise function Random between [–1, 1] α First-Feasible Station Insertion selection probability 0.7 δ1 Worst-Consumption selection probability 0.077 δ2 Random Worst-Consumption selection 0.308 probability δ3 Shaw selection probability 0.231 δ4 Random Worst-Time selection probability 0.077 δ5 Random selection probability 0.154 δ6 Random Route Removal selection probability 0.077 δ7 Greedy Route Removal selection probability 0.077 λ1 Exhaustive Greedy Insertion selection probability 0.077 λ2 Random Greedy Insertion selection probability 0.308 λ3 Regret-2 Insertion selection probability 0.154 λ4 Exhaustive Time-Based Insertion selection probability 0.077 λ5 Random Time-Based Insertion selection probability 0.077 (continued) Electric Vehicle Routing Problem … 189 Table 3 (continued) Param Description Value λ6 Random Greedy with Noise Function Insertion selection probability 0.077 λ7 Regret-2 with Noise Function insertion 0.077 selection probability λ8 Exhaustive Time-Based with Noise 0.077 Function insertion selection probability λ9 Random Time-Based with Noise 0.077 Function insertion selection probability β Number of iterations to remove and reinsert stations 50 References Bruglieri M, Mancini S, Pezzella F, Pisacane O (2016) A new mathematical programming model for the green vehicle routing problem.

Electron Notes Discret Math 55:89–92. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.endm.2016.10.023 Bruglieri M, Pezzella F, Pisacane O, Suraci S (2015) A variable neighborhood search branching for the electric vehicle routing problem with time windows. Electron. Notes Discret. Math. 47:221– 228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.endm.2014.11.029 Çatay B, Keskin M 2017 The impact of quick charging stations on the route planning of electric vehicles.

In: IEEE symposium on computers and communications (ISCC), 2017IEEE, vol 2017, pp 152–157. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCC.2017.8024521. Demir E, Bektaş T, Laporte G (2012) An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the Pollution-Routing Problem. Eur J Oper Res 232(2):346–359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012. 06.044 Desaulniers G, Errico F, Irnich S, Schneider M (2016) Exact algorithms for electric vehicle-routing problems with time windows. Oper Res 64:1388–1405.

https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2016.1535 Erdelić T, Carić T (2019) A survey on the electric vehicle routing problem: variants and solution approaches. J Adv Transp. https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/5075671 Felipe Á, Ortuño MT, Righini G, Tirado G (2014) A heuristic approach for the green vehicle routing problem with multiple technologies and partial recharges. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev 71:111–128.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2014.09.003 Froger A, Mendoza JE, Jabali O, Laporte G (2019) Improved formulations and algorithmic components for the electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging functions. Comput Oper Res 104:256–294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2018.12.013 Froger A, Mendoza JE, Jabali O, Laporte G (2017) A matheuristics for the electric vehicle routing problem with capacitated charging stations. CIRRELT.

Goeke D, Schneider M (2015) Routing a mixed fleet of electric and conventional vehicles. Eur J Oper Res 245:81–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.01.049 Hiermann G, Puchinger J, Ropke S, Hartl RF (2016) The electric fleet size and mix vehicle routing problem with time windows and recharging stations. Eur J Oper Res 252:995–1018. https://doi.

org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.01.038 Hof J, Schneider M, Goeke D (2017) Solving the battery swap station location-routing problem with capacitated electric vehicles using an AVNS algorithm for vehicle-routing problems with intermediate stops. Transp Res Part B Methodol 97:102–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2016. 11.009 190 S. Rastani et al. Kara I, Kara BY, Yetis MK (2007) Energy minimizing vehicle routing problem. Combinatorial optimization and applications.

Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp 62–71 Keskin M, Laporte G, Çatay B (2019) Electric vehicle routing problem with time-dependent waiting times at recharging stations. Comput Oper Res 107:77–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2019. 02.014 Keskin M, Çatay B (2016) Partial recharge strategies for the electric vehicle routing problem with time windows. Transp Res Part C 65:111–127.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.01.013 Keskin M, Çatay B (2018) A matheuristic method for the electric vehicle routing problem with time windows and fast chargers. Comput Oper Res 100:172–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2018. 06.019 Kullman N, Goodson J, Mendoza JE (2018) 2018, June.

Dynamic electric vehicle routing with mid-route recharging and uncertain availability, Seventh international workshop on freight transportation and logistics Montoya A, Gueret C, Mendoza JE, Villegas JG (2017) The electric vehicle routing problem with nonlinear charging function. Transp Res Part B Methodol. 103:87–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.trb.2017.02.004 Paz JC, Granada-Echeverri M, Escobar JW (2018) The multi-depot electric vehicle location routing problem with time windows.

Int J Ind Eng Comput 9:123–136. https://doi.org/10.5267/j.ijiec. 2017.4.001 Pelletier S, Jabali O, Laporte G (2016) 50th anniversary invited article—goods distribution with electric vehicles: review and research perspectives. Transp Sci 50(1):3–22 Pelletier S, Jabali O, Laporte G, Veneroni M (2017) Battery degradation and behaviour for electric vehicles: Review and numerical analyses of several models.

Transp Res Part B Methodol 103:158– 187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2017.01.020 Rastani S, Yüksel T, Çatay B (2019) Effects of ambient temperature on the route planning of electric freight vehicles. Transp Res Part D: Transp Environ 74:124–141 Schiffer M, Schneider M, Laporte G (2018) Designing sustainable mid-haul logistics networks with intra-route multi-resource facilities. Eur J Oper Res 265:517–532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.

2017.07.067 Schiffer M, Walther G (2017) The electric location routing problem with time windows and partial recharging. Eur J Oper Res 260(3):995–1013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.01.011 Schneider M, Stenger A, Goeke D (2014) The electric vehicle routing problem with time windows and recharging stations. Transp Sci 48:500–520. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2013.0490 Shaw P (1998) Using constraint programming and local search methods to solve vehicle routing problems.

In International conference on principles and practice of constraint programming. pp 417–431. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-49481-2_30 Solomon MM (1987) Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with time window constraints. Oper res 35(2):254–265. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.35.2.254 Wen M, Linde E, Ropke S, Mirchandani P, Larsen A (2016) An adaptive large neighborhood search heuristic for the electric vehicle scheduling problem.

Comput Oper Res 76:73–83. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cor.2016.06.013 Wu X, Freese D, Cabrera A, Kitch WA (2015) Electric vehicles’ energy consumption measurement and estimation. Transp Res Part D 34:52–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2014.10.007 Xiao Y, Zhao Q, Kaku I, Xu Y (2012) Development of a fuel consumption optimization model for the capacitated vehicle routing problem. Comput Oper Res 39(7):1419–1431. https://doi.org/10.

1016/j.cor.2011.08.013 Yang J, Sun H (2015) Battery swap station location-routing problem with capacitated electric vehicles. Comput Oper Res 55:217–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2014.07.003 Zachariadis EE, Tarantilis CD, Kiranoudis CT, (2015) The load-dependent vehicle routing problem and its pick-up and delivery extension. Transp Res Part B 71, 158–181.

https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.trb.2014.11.004 Applicability of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought to Modern Corporate Governance in the Maritime Shipping Industry Shiang-Min Meng Abstract This study explores the applicability of ancient Chinese philosophy— namely, Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian thought—to current considerations regarding corporate governance in the maritime shipping industry.

It adopts the ethical thought in Laozi’s Daodejing, considerations on humaneness and soul in Confucius’ Analects, and Mencius’ account of moral spirit and humane governance. These ideas are then applied to the principles of corporate governance put forward by the Organization for Economic Development. The results show that Daoism has positive effects on Confucianism and on Mencian thought, but only indirect effects on corporate governance.

However, Confucianism has a positive influence on the thought of Mencius, and Confucianism and Mencian thought play a significant role in corporate governance. This study considers ways by which Chinese corporate leaders can establish ethical criteria based on Confucianism and Mencian thought. An empirical study was conducted among 118 stakeholders in the maritime industry.

To test the relationship, structural equation modeling was used to uncover the relationships among Daoism, Confucianism, Mencian thought, and corporate governance. Keywords Daoism · Confucianism · Mencian · Corporate governance 1 Introduction As demonstrated by the Enron scandal, executives can create a negative culture that sets the stage for self-interested action and unethical accounting that influences employees and organizational behavior (Treviño et al.

2003) In 2008, the Lehman Brothers scandal played a major role in the financial crisis that subsequently destroyed worldwide economic development and political stability. Such events provide lessons on the importance of corporate governance.

Leadership is influenced by a set of processes, customs, policies, laws, and institutions that affect S.-M. Meng (B) Department of International Logistics and Transportation Management, Kainan University, Taoyuan City, Taiwan e-mail: eddymeng@mail.knu.edu.tw © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_13 191 192 S.-M. Meng how a corporation is directed, administered, and controlled.

Shareholders influence the behavior of managers to ensure that a company is run according to their interests (Hemailin and Weisbach 2003) and according to Western models of governance whereby shareholders bear the ultimate responsibility for avoiding moral hazards (Ward et al. 2009). Indeed, corporations act in their own interest and can change the rules of the game to ensure that their interests are protected (Bragues 2008).

Inadequate corporate governance is also a key factor in failures of Asian corporations (Meng and Liang 2011) and these problems can be attributed to the ethics and moral character of individuals.

According to the Organization for Economic Development (OECD), companies are encouraged to disclose policies relating to business ethics, the environment, and other public policy commitments (OECD 2004), and government has an important responsibility and must be sufficiently flexible to allow markets to function effectively and to respond to the expectations of corporate governance.

Kelly (1990) argued that ethical leaders are valuable and that prosperity-seeking organizations should obtain the social services of such leaders, whose ethical behavior is the result of a socialization process (Jones 1995). Thus, this is empirical evidence that suggests preventing future ethical breakdowns. Leaders have received much attention as a means of protecting corporate governance and providing structures and processes by which to direct and manage organizations.

They deliver on management accountability and thus protect corporate governance. An ethical leader will increase ethical awareness within organizations linked to corporate objectives as an element of management discourse (Husted and Allen 2000). Fulmer and Barry (2009) demonstrated that a positive mood can reduce critical thinking and concern regarding dubious unethical activities. Treviño et al.

(2003) argued that leaders should engage with ethical figures who are concerned with the community and society. Ethical leaders are pressured to behave in a socially responsible manner (Campbell 2007). Effective corporate governance relies on both the internal moral behavior of leaders and the external ethical considerations that control the systems that cover corporate managerial boards when disclosing unethical or unlawful behavior in corporations (Ward et al. 2009).

Leadership structures encourage and facilitate the occurrence of occupational crime (Zahra et al. 2005). This study focuses on the applicability of ancient Chinese philosophy—specifically, Daoism, Confucianism, and the thought of Mencius—to modern Chinese corporations, and compares ancient ethical considerations to corporate governance guidelines set forth by the OECD. Ethical behavior is sometimes defined merely as acts and behavior that exceed moral minimums (Treviño et al. 2006).

OECD efforts on corporate governance will help to develop a culture of values that pertain to professional and ethical behavior on which well-functioning markets depend. Corporate governance focuses on legislative policy to deter fraudulent activity and promote transparency—although, as such, it merely treats the symptoms and not the cause of the problem (Gabrielle 2003).

Indeed, structural reforms of the type promoted by the corporate governance movement will do little to prevent the recurrence of widespread wrongdoing (Bragues 2008). Thus, the aim of this study is to investigate Applicability of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought … 193 corporate governance from the perspective of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian thought, with particular focus on the maritime shipping industry.

2 Criteria of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought China is one of the cradles of world civilization, ancient China venerated Daoist wisdom as the harmony between humans and nature, and the need for calmness during the vigorous interaction of yin and yang. The Bible in the West and Laozi’s writings in East have been translated frequently, and they have spread widely around the world. Laozi’s Daodejing has been venerated, and Laozi himself has been worshipped as a god.

The ideal of humaneness and the concept of harmony is central to Confucianism, and its founder, Confucius, was venerated by later generations as a sage and a holy teacher. Mencius was posthumously given designated the Second Sage of Confucianism during the Yuan Dynasty, insofar as he reformed Confucian doctrine and served as its interpreter. As an academic value system, Mencian thought continued to be so used during the Ming and Qing Dynasties, forming the core of the new classical studies.

Confucian indicated the governance paths that initially step is making personal will sincere to depends on setting one’s soul right to regulate the home, govern the nation, and, ultimately, to restore peace in the world. Meng (2013a) argued that ethical leaders often adopt Mencian ideas as a key element in the long-term development of enterprises, whereas leaders with poor ethics will negatively influence the operation of organizations.

Thus, Mencian thought can be used by ethical leaders to solve governance problems. High ethical standards are in the long-term interests of a company as a means of credibility and trustworthiness, not only in daily operations, but also with respect to longer-term commitments (OECD 2004). Zheng (2004) showed that the existence of corporate governance can restrain the morally hazardous behavior of entrepreneurs in China.

It is thus important that Chinese leaders follow Daoism and Confucianism to establish suitable corporate governance criteria. Although corporate governance is confronted with business laws and mechanisms, the ethical and moral virtues of leaders are more useful to governance and less at risk of being mistreated.

A survey of the literature on Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian principles for current corporate governance revealed evidence suggesting that regulatory and legal structures should be altered to improve the ethical and moral codes of corporate governance. Modern laws and regulations hold little promise, but the prevention of corporate misconduct can be facilitated by ancient Chinese philosophical codes (Meng and Liang 2011).

This means that workable Confucian and Mencian ideas can be used by ethical leaders to alleviate negative selfish actions by providing internal control systems with appropriate audits, and by communicating with boards of directors and treating corporate governance fairly. This study first established the parameters for four constructs: Daoism, Confucianism, Mencian thought, and corporate governance. Thus, we obtained an overall definition of an ethical leader.

First, Laozi’s Daodejing (DDJ) and the work of Meng and Liang (2011) were used to generate the ethical criteria for ten survey items 194 S.-M. Meng based on Daoism. After reviewing the Analects related to humaneness and adulthood in Meng (2019), we added ten survey items based on Confucianism. Considerations regarding moral spirit and humane governance, as described in Meng (2013a), provided ten additional items based on Mencian thought.

Finally, the OECD principles of corporate governance in Meng (2013b) comprised the last ten survey items based on modern corporate governance. 3 Methodology and Model The aim of this study was to determine the main factors that influence the ethics and moral behavior of corporate management in terms of ancient Chinese philosophy. The popular seven-point Likert scale was used (Gallarza et al. 2002; Meng and Liang 2011).

Based on ancient Chinese philosophy and OECD guidelines, a list of 40 items (see Table 1) was included in the questionnaire Windsor (2006). argued that corporate self-restraint and altruistic activities can serve to expand public policy and benefit stakeholders. Using discriminant analysis of our four constructs of corporate governance, we developed and validated a concise model that establishes ethical mechanisms to prevent internal control failures.

The viewpoint of various stakeholders can provide an acceptable overview of the different theoretical perspectives of corporate governance (Dignam and Lowry 2006). Thus, these questionnaire items were pre-tested on 30 stakeholders from the shipping industry. After validating all 40 items, the survey was distributed to 150 members of the shipping industry from August to October, 2019.

Of these, 124 questionnaires were returned, and six questionnaires were discarded because they contained incomplete information. Therefore, there were 118 usable responses in total, for an overall response rate of 78.6%. Statistical analyses and factor analysis were conducted using SPSS. Factor analysis was performed to investigate any separate underlying factors, and to reduce redundancy.

To test the relationship, we used structural equation modeling on the four structures (viz., Daoism, Confucian, Mencian thought, and corporate governance) using AMOS. All of the candidate fitness assessments indicated a good fit, with χ2 = 3002.480, df = 681, a comparative fit index of 0.713, a goodness-of-fit index of 0.677, a Tucker– Lewis index of 0.803, and a root mean squared error of approximation of 0.150.

The results shown in Table 1 indicate that the measurement model met the discriminant validity criterion. The structural model used to test the relationships consisted of all four latent constructs. The test results for the proposed model are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 1. For all structural path estimates, Daoism was positively linked to Confucianism (β = 0.877, P < 0.001) and Mencian thought (β = 0.548, P < 0.001), but was not significantly linked to corporate governance (β = 0.031, P > 0.05).

Confucianism was positively linked to Mencian thought (β = 0.381, P < 0.001).

Confucianism (β = 0.335, P < 0.001) and Mencian thought (β = 0.463, P < 0.001) were both positively Applicability of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought … 195 Table 1 Standardized loading (SL), Cronbach’s α, CR, and AVE for the model Construct and items SL t-value Leader behaves with civility and humility 0.716 14.190 Leader is caring and virtuous 0.734 15.216 Leader is committed to advocacy of moral concepts 0.784 14.261 Daoism (α = 0.812; CR = 0.871; AVE = 0.78) Leader has industrious and frugal habits 0.612 11.127 Leader has an ethical mind from the perspective of people 0.788 21.486 Leader is selfless in relation to the company and society 0.729 17.418 Leader has great moral faith 0.789 19.114 Leader exhibits goodness and integrity 0.746 23.482 Leader sacrifices his own interests to share with others 0.812 16.657 Leader shows patience and peace of mind 0.788 17.472 0.641 18.719 Confucianism (α = 0.768; CR = 0.801; AVE = 0.78) Humaneness characteristics behave with ritual heart Humaneness characteristics is moral to be worthy of appreciation 0.785 17.647 Humaneness characteristics are committed to within the class of charity 0.785 17.420 Humaneness characteristics stay alive at the expense of faithfulness 0.818 19.427 Humaneness characteristics are determined intellectual man 0.765 17.567 Manhood soul is being trustworthy treats employees 0.689 16.541 Manhood soul purses the goal being a bravery man 0.785 17.850 Manhood soul is responsibility without forming cliques 0.798 16.912 Manhood soul cares for working environment, protect employee benefits 0.801 18.401 Manhood soul takes care of humane love 0.831 17.454 Moral spirit behaves with care and humility 0.712 14.962 Moral spirit is loving and righteous 0.856 19.142 Moral spirit is committed to the resolution of righteousness 0.805 19.084 Moral spirit behaves with care and humility 0.799 17.121 Moral spirit is selfless to society 0.451 8.610 Humane governance implements taking care of a humane government 0.767 19.452 Humane governance implements the mind to produce an enduring nature 0.901 21.481 Humane governance implements producing a sudden seizure of righteousness used to control the mind 0.785 19.149 Humane governance implements taking care of a humane government 0.804 16.422 Humane governance implements treating employees with respect for their culture and civil rights 0.912 24.312 Mencian thought (α = 0.871; CR = 0.867; AVE = 0.83) (continued) 196 S.-M. Meng Table 1 (continued) Construct and items SL t-value No approval of material transactions without a majority vote at shareholder meetings 0.811 23.478 Remuneration for directors and supervisors determined at shareholder meetings 0.772 18.412 Details on the fairness and legitimacy of management remuneration and bonuses are disclosed 0.798 18.118 Details on employee salary, benefits, on-the-job training, pension plans, and company support of employee rights are disclosed 0.713 15.542 Insider trading and abusive self-dealing are prohibited Corporate governance (α = 0.864; CR = 0.844; AVE = 0.86) 0.687 11.442 Disqualified directors should be removed from office by a resolution adopted 0.612 at a shareholder meeting 9.412 Implementation of major resolutions approved by management 0.785 15.954 Annual dividends fairly distributed among shareholders 0.745 16.412 Relevant and material information on the corporation disclosed in the annual 0.779 report to shareholders 15.897 Leaders secure the methods of ownership registration for corporate governance 19.987 0.912 Table 2 Test results Relationship Result Dependent variable Standardized parameter estimate t-value Independent variable Daoism Confucianism 0.877 11.14 Linked Daoism Mencian thought 0.548 7.64 Linked Daoism Corporate governance 0.031 0.42 Unlinked Confucianism Mencian thought 0.381 5.65 Linked Confucianism Corporate governance 0.335 7.03 Linked Mencian thought Corporate governance 0.463 9.21 Linked linked to corporate governance.

Overall, five of the six proposed relationships tested using the structural model were linked. 4 Results and Conclusion According to the research results, Daoism positively affects Confucianism and Mencian thought, but has only an indirect effect on corporate governance.

Confucianism positively influences Mencian thought; in addition, Confucianism and Applicability of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought … 197 Confucianism 0.877*** 0.335*** 0.381*** Daoism Corporate governance 0.031 0.548*** 0.463*** Mencian thought Fig. 1 Internal consistency of the model. *** P < 0.001 Mencian thought play a significant role in corporate governance. The overall framework for Daoism goes beyond Confucianism and Mencian thought.

This process should be underpinned by legal protections for corporate leaders in the maritime industry. Company-specific characteristics have been suggested as important contributors to understanding the differences in corporate governance mechanisms in a given system (Weir et al. 2002). Effective corporate governance can disperse exploitative action by unethical leaders. Confucianism and Mencian thought provide mechanisms that can ensure that modern corporate leaders operate ethically.

La Porta et al. (2000) concluded that the role of corporate governance is to enforce ethical codes. The type of corporate governance favored by various ethical and moral codes reflects differences in corporate governance. Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian thought can be implemented by today’s boards of directors, audit committees, management, and personnel, to provide reasonable assurances of reliable financial reporting, operating efficiency, and compliance with laws and regulations.

Arjoon (2005) argued that there is a tendency to overemphasize legal compliance mechanisms. Philosophical practices based on the principle of equity should be understood in terms of the governance environment. China has a more relation-based governance system, as it lacks a comprehensive rule of law (Li and Filer 2007), and corporate governance has traditionally sought to use this as the main parameter when evaluating leaders.

Hence, this research suggests that property rights—and, by implication, an increasing amount of corporate governance-based practices—are gaining awareness regarding the role of a firm’s Confucian policies. Board members are also playing an increasingly important role in monitoring the actions of corporations and their efforts to conduct business in environmentally and socially responsible ways (Armour et al. 2003).

The study showed that for the common aim of facilitating Confucianism and Mencian thought, the choice and ultimate design depends on the overall research 198 S.-M. Meng framework. Business ethics and corporate awareness of the environmental and societal interests of the communities in which companies operate also have an impact on their reputation and long-term success (OECD 2004).

Both Confucianism and Mencian thought should interact with corporate governance in a transparent manner to monitor the conduct of management. According to the OECD (2004), corporate governance objectives are also formulated in voluntary codes and standards that do not have legal status, leaving management and other stakeholders with uncertainty concerning their status and implementation.

Organizations must address procedures and structures to repair moral legitimacy and illegitimate organizational structures, which have a negative effect on the moral legitimacy of Chinese firms (Wang 2010). Hence, this study identified 40 governance criteria for leaders to take into account for effective enforcement, including the ability of leaders to deter dishonest behavior and to impose effective sanctions for violations.

An ethical leader is a key person, and evaluations of ethical leadership are likely to depend on subjective perceptions of a leader’s character and motives (Treviño et al. 2003). This study conceptualized the viewpoint of stakeholders regarding empirical applications of new evaluations of the ethical and moral criteria. This study demonstrated that Daoist ideas of leadership are negatively related to corporate governance, when leaders cannot address corporate governance through OECD principles.

It also found that Confucian and Mencian programs and policies are successful. Garriga and Mele (2004) argued that leaders can cement the relationship between business and society. Doing so would provide a system for structuring, operating, and controlling companies with a view to achieving long-term strategic goals that satisfy corporate governance, creditors, employees, customers, and suppliers, in compliance with legal and regulatory requirements and environmental and local community needs.

Meng (2019) emphasized Confucianism in the characteristics of leaders to instill a sense of virtue in terms of the methods and power a leader uses for managerial activities, as opposed to directing leaders with a mixture of laws, regulations, and checks and balances (Meng 2013b). Ancient Chinese thought has modern merit, particularly in terms of corporate governance and the integration of core ethical and moral insights.

This study thus proposes that Chinese leaders should establish virtues based on Confucianism and Mencian thought to improve modern commercial societies. References Arjoon S (2005) Corporate governance: an ethical perspective. J Bus Ethics 61:343–352 Armour J, Deakin S, Konzelmann SJ (2003) Shareholder primacy and the trajectory of UK corporate governance. Br J Ind Relat 41:531–555 Bragues G (2008) The ancients against the moderns: focusing on the character of corporate leaders.

J Bus Ethics 78:373–387 Campbell JL (2007) Why would corporations behave in socially responsible ways? An institutional theory of corporate social responsibility. Acad Manag Rev 32:946–967 Dignam A, Lowry J (2006) Company law. Oxford University Applicability of Daoism, Confucianism, and Mencian Thought … 199 Fulmer IS, Barry B (2009) Managed hearts and wallets: ethical issues in emotional influence by and within organizations.

Bus Ethics Q 19:155–191 Gabrielle OD (2003) Change management-a board culture of corporate governance. Mondaq Business Briefing. Gallarza MG, Saura IG, Garcia HC (2002) Destination image towards a conceptual framework. Ann Tour Res 29:56–78 Garriga E, Mele D (2004) Corporate social responsibility theories: mapping the territory. J Bus Ethics 53:51–71 Hemailin BE, Weisbach M (2003) Boards of directors as an endogenously determined institutions: A survey of the economic literature.

Econ Policy Rev 9:7–26 Husted WH, Allen DB (2000) Is it ethical to use ethics as strategy? J Bus Ethics 27:21–31 Jones HB (1995) The ethical leader: an ascetic construct. J Bus Ethics 14:867–874 Kelly DJ (1990) Ethics: the tone at the top. Manag Account 70:18–19 La Porta R, Lopez-De-Silanles F, Shleifer A, Vishny R (2000) Investor protection and corporate governance.

J Financ Econ 58:3–27 Li S, Filer L (2007) The effects of the governance environment on the choice of investment mode and the strategic implications. J World Bus 42:80–98 Meng SM (2013a) The application of Mengzi to today’s ethical criteria for maritime leader in Taiwan. Int J Asian Soc Sci 3:1227–1235 Meng SM (2013b) Application of Laozi’s DAODEJING to current corporate governance.

Int J Asian Soc Sci 3:2114–2133 Meng SM (2019) The ancient Confucian of Analects to today’s moral criteria of maritime leader in Taiwan. Int J Asian Soc Sci 9:66–73 Meng SM, Liang GS (2011) The application of Laozi’s DAODEJING to today’s maritime leaders: an empirical study from stakeholders’ viewpoints in Taiwan. Afr J Bus Manag 5:11955–11967 OECD (2004) OECD principles of corporate Governance.

OECD Publications Service Treviño LK, Brown M, Hartman LP (2003) A qualitative investigation of perceived executive ethical leadership: perceptions from inside and outside the executive suite. Hum Relat 56:5–37 Treviño LK, Weaver GR, Reynolds SJ (2006) Behavioral ethics in organizations, a review. J Manag 32:951–990 Wang P (2010) Restructuring to repair legitimacy-a contingency perspective.

Corp Gov Int Rev 18:64–82 Ward AJ, Brown JA, Rodriguez D (2009) Governance bundles, firm performance, and the substitutability and complementarity of governance mechanisms. Corp Gov Int Rev 17:646–660 Weir C, Laing D, McKnight PJ (2002) Internal and external governance mechanisms: their impact on the performance of large UK public companies. J Bus Financ Account 29:579–611 Windsor D (2006) Corporate social responsibility: three key approaches.

J Manage Stud 43:93–114 Zahra SA, Priem RL, Rasheed AA (2005) The antecedents and consequences of top management fraud. J Manag 31:803–828 Zheng Z (2004) The conflicts of interest among investors and integration of corporate governance mechanisms.

Econ Res J 2:115–125 Human Factor in Logistics and Supply Chain Management Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics: Challenges and Recommendations for Action Christian Hein, Nora Eichhorn, and Rainer Lasch Abstract Providing help to people in need is the responsibility of society and does not exclude logistical issues. Especially in this area of logistics research, a strong practical orientation is of great importance.

Case study research is often seen as a suitable instrument to bridge the gap between research and practice and is therefore particularly recommended. However, since the contextual influences in humanitarian operations are very diverse, this research method is exposed to specific challenges. There is a lack of a systematic consideration of these challenges and a comprehensive guideline for researchers.

Therefore, this chapter aims at systematically identifying and categorizing the challenges in conducting case study research in the context of humanitarian logistics. Practical recommendations for the application of this research method will be developed to overcome these obstacles. To achieve the research objectives, a mixed-method approach was chosen. First, a systematic literature review was carried out.

In addition, six interviews with experts were conducted, all of whom have extensive experience in the field of case study research in the context of humanitarian logistics. The recommendations for action are based on a qualitative and deductive methodology.

The results of the study show that four characteristics of humanitarian logistics represent unique challenges for case study research and must therefore be considered particularly: the dynamic environment, the political as well as the international context, and the general complexity. Keywords Humanitarian logistics · Logistics ethics · Research method · Case study 1 Introduction Natural disasters cause devastating damage worldwide.

In 2018, losses resulting from 315 natural catastrophes worldwide totaled approximately US$ 132bn. Despite the alarming consequences of these catastrophes for the global economy, the impact on C. Hein (B) · N. Eichhorn · R. Lasch TU Dresden, Chair of Business Management, esp. Logistics, 01062 Dresden, Germany e-mail: christian.hein@tu-dresden.de © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_14 203 204 C. Hein et al. human life remains the most significant challenge. Although the year 2018 was rather mild compared to previous years, approximately 11,800 people died as a direct result of the natural disasters, and more than 68 million were affected (CRED 2019). But it is not only natural disasters that cause tremendous suffering.

Man-made disasters are also a significant challenge for humanitarian actors nowadays. According to UNHCR (2020a), more people are currently fleeing than ever before. The crisis in Syria has forced more than 5.6 million people to leave the country, and a further 6.6 million Syrians are registered as Internally Displaced Persons (UNHCR 2020b). In the event of a major disaster, the difficulty is to provide sufficient emergency supplies exactly when and where they are needed.

Logistics is, therefore, an essential element of any disaster relief operation and may determine the level of success of the operation. Financial expenditure on logistics can cause high costs, especially in the acute phases following the outbreak of a disaster (Hein et al. 2020). Humanitarian organizations are, therefore, under pressure to make logistics activities efficient and transparent (van Wassenhove 2006).

For this reason, so-called humanitarian logistics is in the focus of an increasingly comprehensive research base that aims to address the challenges in disaster management (Kovács and Spens 2007). The scientific interest has manifested itself in the publication of articles in several journals, in special editions, as well as in a series of conferences on this topic (Kovács and Spens 2009).

However, there is criticism that humanitarian logistics research lacks the necessary practical relevance (Kunz and Reiner 2012). In response to this criticism, qualitative research, and in particular case study research, has emerged in the field of humanitarian logistics as the most commonly used method (Chiappetta Jabbour et al. 2019).

According to Vega (2018), transparently documented, trustworthy, and rigorously conducted case studies have the potential to contribute to advancements in humanitarian logistics research. However, his findings also show that the rigor with which such scientific papers are produced is not necessarily provided. Especially among the numerous challenges in humanitarian logistics, there is a lack of specific guidance on how to conduct case studies.

This paper is thus the first to focus on the systematic analysis of the challenges in case study research in humanitarian logistics. The paper aims to identify and categorize the associated challenges and to develop practical recommendations for action. In particular, the following research questions are addressed: RQ1: What are the challenges in conducting a case study, especially in the context of humanitarian logistics? RQ2: How can these challenges be categorized?

RQ3: How can these challenges be addressed when conducting a case study in the context of humanitarian logistics? To answer these explorative research questions, two methods are applied: a systematic literature search as well as expert interviews. In summary, the work provides an opportunity for researchers, humanitarian organizations, and other actors in the humanitarian sector to develop a better understanding of case study research requirements.

This work is structured as follows: In the following Sect. 2, the theoretical foundations are outlined, including a brief overview of humanitarian logistics Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 205 and an introduction to the method of case study research. The methodology of this work is described in Sect. 3. The evaluation and presentation of the results will take place in Sect. 4. This paper concludes in Sect. 5 with a summary, its limitations, and an outlook on further research.

2 Theoretical Background 2.1 Humanitarian Logistics Humanitarian logistics aims to support disaster-affected people by delivering the right material, in the right quantity, with the right quality, at the right time, and to the right place. This objective is very similar to that of commercial logistics.

It is therefore not astonishing that Thomas and Kopczak (2005) define humanitarian logistics as “the process of planning, implementing and controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow and storage of goods and materials, as well as related information […] for the purpose of alleviating the suffering of vulnerable people”.

Apte (2009) specifies that humanitarian logistics is a specific branch of logistics that manages the response chain of critical supplies and services with challenges such as surges in demand, uncertain deliveries, critical time windows, and a wide operational scope. Differentiation is often made based on the phases of disaster management to systematize the tasks and requirements of humanitarian logistics.

The following three phases are distinguished, among others: preparedness, immediate response, and reconstruction (Kovács and Spens 2009). Although commercial and humanitarian logistics are closely related, there are significant differences which characterize the humanitarian environment and pose specific challenges.

A considerable feature affecting the operations of humanitarian organizations is that the ultimate ambition of humanitarian organizations is to save lives and to reduce suffering while the strategic objective in the commercial context is to generate financial returns; for the former, finances are more seen as constraints rather than objectives (Kovács and Spens 2007). This difference has significant influences on logistical activities. Holguín-Veras et al.

(2012) note that, in humanitarian logistics, so-called social costs ought to be reduced. In contrast to commercial logistics, where externalities are neglected, and only the logistics (private) costs are considered, these social costs must include externalities. After all, not-performed logistics service in a relief operation can cause losses in human life, which could be treated as an externality in the comprehension of commercial logistics.

However, in humanitarian logistics, this aspect cannot be neglected, and therefore, externalities must be considered. Moreover, humanitarian organizations often establish strict principles which determine their actions; they attempt to act with humanity, neutrality, impartiality, and independence. Relief operations involve a multitude of stakeholders with heterogeneous needs and aims, such as the recipients of service, donors, staff and volunteers, aid agencies 206 C. Hein et al.

and NGOs, governments, and the military (Beamon and Balcik 2008). During the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, over 40 countries and 700 NGOs were involved (Chia 2007) and as most of them are operating in independent supply chains and have their funding and organizational systems (Hein 2019), coordination indeed poses a major challenge (Jahre and Jensen 2010).

The lack of information sharing and cooperation creates a highly dynamic, informal, and often improvised decisionmaking process, in contrast to the commercial sector which is featured by formal structures, standardized procedures, and clearly defined roles and responsibilities (Holguín-Veras et al. 2012).

Nevertheless, Schulz and Blecken (2010) figured out that, in the humanitarian sector, the same potential benefits from cooperation can be realized as in the private sector, such as cost reduction and concentration on core competencies. Balcik et al. (2010) note that some cooperation efforts have already been undertaken, especially those mechanisms with the greatest potential for implementation (e.g. collaborative procurement and third-party warehousing).

Also, joint logistics activities and partnerships between private sector companies and relief organizations are increasing. Humanitarian logistics is shaped by an environment which is highly volatile and dynamic. As the time, the location, the type, and the size of a disaster are often unpredictable and the lead times can be very shortened or even nonexistent, humanitarian logistics has to cope with these uncertainties on demand (Beamon and Balcik 2008).

The relatively steady flow of goods, characterized by repeated activities in the commercial sector, is not realizable for a once-in-a-lifetime disaster with a surge of demand (Holguín-Veras et al. 2012). There are further unknowns in capabilities, personnel, the process stability and even the other activists on-site, especially at the beginning of a relief operation (Blecken 2009).

Besides, humanitarian logisticians have to work under enormous time pressure; while in the commercial context delays might be accepted, the timely response in a humanitarian operation truly can be a matter of life and death (van Wassenhove 2006). In addition, disaster situations are highly complex and chaotic. Damaged infrastructure may block access to regions and people in need. The infrastructure can be further susceptible to seasonal conditions.

Transportation and storage capabilities might be damaged, and an overall lack of equipment and resources is possible. In this context, the skills of humanitarian staff should also be highlighted, as there is often a deficiency of logistics expertise and career paths (Sandwell 2011). Another considerable problem concerns the communication and information infrastructure, which is notably lacking in developing countries.

However, supply chains have become more and more dependent on information (Oloruntoba and Gray 2006), which makes the corresponding infrastructure crucial for disaster management. All these uncertainties and challenges, as well as the deficits in infrastructure and capacities, must be dealt with within the context of humanitarian logistics (c.f. Table 1).

Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 207 Table 1 Comparison of commercial and humanitarian logistics (Beamon and Balcik 2008; Holguín-Veras et al.

2012; Kovács and Spens 2007) Commercial logistics Humanitarian logistics Main objective Generate financial return (reduction of private costs) Save lives, reduce suffering (reduction of social costs) Time effects Delays might be accepted Delays might result in lost lives Decision-making/procedures Formal structures, standardized procedures, clearly defined roles and responsibilities Dynamic, informal, and often improvised (decision-making) processes Logistical activities Relatively steady flow of goods, Unpredictable, once in a characterized by repeated lifetime activities Infrastructure and resources Stable and functional Restricted/lack of equipment, resources, and skilled staff possible Actors Predetermined and homogeneous actors Multitude of diverse and heterogeneous actors with complex relations Environment Relatively constant Highly volatile and dynamic 2.2 Case Study Research Case studies in the scientific sense are empirical investigations that examine a phenomenon in its real context.

This qualitative research method aims to develop an understanding of a complex topic and is particularly suitable when the boundaries between phenomenon and context are not apparent. A case study is based on several sources of evidence (Yin 2009). Merriam (1998) considers qualitative case studies as an intensive, holistic description and analysis of a limited phenomenon. The phenomenon can be a program, an institution, a person, or a process.

To distinguish the case study method from other research methods, Merriam (1998) emphasizes the specific characteristics of a case study: particularistic, descriptive, heuristic. Stake (1995) also deals with characteristic properties for case studies, namely that they be holistic, empirical, interpretive, and emphatic. A case has a delimiting character to its environment (Stake 1995; Merriam 1998; Yin 2009). Ragin (1992) considers this demarcation in spatial and temporal terms.

Merriam (1998) describes a case as a kind of phenomenon that occurs and is influenced in a specifically defined context. Yin (2003) describes a case as a contemporary phenomenon in its real context. The researcher has little control over the phenomenon and the context. The procedure of case study research can be divided into four phases: planning, data collection, analysis, and reporting (c.f. Fig. 1).

The planning phase aims to develop a guideline for further procedure, by concretizing the design used within the case study. Yin (2009) proposes four types of designs. These types differ in the selection of the research object (case). Regarding the 208 Fig. 1 Process of case study research (Modified from Yin 2003) C. Hein et al. (1) Planning Co mpo nent s a) b) c) d) e) Research question Purpose Unit of Analysis Logic Decision criteria (2) Data collection Prin cip.

a) Multiple sources of data b) Case study database c) Chain of evidence (3) Data analysis (4) Reporting Strat egie s a) b) c) d) Data triangulation Investigator triangulation Theory triangulation Methodological triangulation case selection, a decision must be made on the number of cases. Single case studies consider only one single case. In general, it is recommended to examine several cases (multiple case). A further distinction is the scope of the case.

Possible design types are holistic or embedded case studies. Yin (2009) recommends choosing the design that offers the highest possible instrumentality to answer the research questions. Therefore, the strengths and weaknesses of each design should be considered. The selected design of the case study research consists of five components: research questions, purpose, unit of analysis, the logic linking the data to the purpose, and the criteria for interpreting the results.

When designing the research, the researcher should ensure that these components are coherent and consistent. The first component includes the problem definition and the research objectives. To be able to develop hypotheses for case studies, a literature review should be conducted in advance. Regarding the second component, the research must have a distinct purpose. The third component is related to the fundamental problem of defining the case.

The fourth and fifth components relate to planning the steps of data analysis in the case study method. The fourth component includes time series analysis and data analysis, while the fifth component requires the researcher to identify and address rival explanations (Yin 2003). Yin (2003) points out that after the start of the second phase of data collection, minor changes can be made to the research design.

For significant changes, it is recommended to return to the first step of conceptualization to redesign the case study. To capture the complexity and completeness of the case under investigation, the task of the researcher in data collection is to obtain data from multiple sources of evidence (Yazan 2015).

Yin (2003) suggests using six sources of evidence: Documents, archive Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 209 data, interviews, direct observations, participant observation, and physical artefacts. While interviews, observations, and participant observation are time-consuming, they provide data which originates closer to reality. Documents, artefacts, and archive data may be partially limited in availability.

Their advantage is that these secondary data sources provide supporting material. Furthermore, Yin (2009) lists principles that apply to the entire data collection process. The first principle states the use of multiple sources of evidence. Evidence must refer to the same facts for the purpose of triangulation. The second principle involves the creation of a case study database.

The formal collection of evidence helps in the handling and management of data and guides the formulation of the final case study report. The third principle is the creation of chains of evidence, i.e. explicit links between the research questions, the data collected, and their conclusions (Yin 2009). In the data analysis phase, both quantitative and qualitative evidence is examined, categorized, and tabulated (Yin 2003). Four criteria can measure the quality of the analysis.

These include construct validity, internal validity, external validity, and reliability. Construct validity is achieved by triangulating multiple sources of evidence, chains of evidence, and checks by other team members. By using analytical techniques such as pattern matching, internal validity can be achieved. External validity describes the analytical generalization of findings. Reliability can be ensured through case study protocols and databases.

As an overriding criterion, researchers must always respect the principle of objectivity. Compliance with the principles of proper case study research leads to a certain degree of transparency and traceability. In the final phase of report preparation, relevant target groups are identified, and the results are made available through appropriate presentations. This phase is essential for the exchange of findings and conclusions for confirmation by the case study participants.

3 Methodology 3.1 Literature Review A systematic literature review is an essential part of a research project to analyze a specific scientific field. Using this method, a solid basis is created by identifying and subsequently evaluating all relevant literature sources (vom Brocke et al. 2009). A literature analysis should provide an overview of the research topic, develop new approaches for the research area, and uncover gaps in research (Webster and Watson 2002).

Fink (2014) stresses that attention should be paid to ensuring transparent implementation. The approach of the literature review in this work combines the two approaches of vom Brocke et al. (2009) and Fink (2014) and is briefly outlined below. The steps are divided into problem formulation, concept development, implementation, and presentation of results. 210 C. Hein et al.

Table 2 Combination of search terms and selected criteria for the literature search Challenges in case study research Challenge, boundar*, problem, obstacle, difficult*, limitation, OR barrier AND case stud* Humanitarian Humanitarian, emergency, catastrophe, OR disaster Logistics Logistic*, fleet management, OR supply chain management -Language: English -Publication period: no restriction -Publication medium: no restriction -Search field: title, abstract To guarantee a large number of matches, the five academic databases Academic Search Complete, Business Source Complete, ScienceDirect, Emerald Insight, and IEEE Xplore were used for the search.

The selected search terms were derived from the theoretical foundations of this work and according to the research questions. They are divided into three sub-aspects, which were combined in the search. For the first aspect, “challenges in case study research”, the search terms challenge, boundary, problem, obstacle, difficulty, limitation, or barrier were combined with the term case study.

The second sub-aspect, “humanitarian”, includes the search terms humanitarian, emergency, catastrophe, and disaster, while the third sub-aspect, “logistics”, included logistics, fleet management, and supply chain management. Following, the different search terms were combined to one search phrase. The formulation of the search terms was supported by the online tool LitSonar.

The search was conducted in English, without any limitation of the publication period, and carried out in the abstract and title. Table 2 summarizes the procedure of the database research process. The search results were analyzed using a two-stage screening process. The relevance of the articles was first checked based on the title and abstracts (rough selection) and finally based on the full text (final selection).

The execution of the database search, in which all three sub-aspects of the search term were used, resulted in only one relevant match. To find more literature sources, the previous phase of concept development was revised concerning the search terms. For this purpose, the theory of the degree of subject linkage could be used.

In general, the degree of subject linkage indicates the extent to which the content of the respective source is related to the topic or the exact objective of the analysis (Karmasin and Ribing 2012). In the literature search, the search terms were systematically generalized in order to obtain more results. When using the subject linkage level I, the search terms as described above were used.

The second level of topic linkage (subject linkage level II) only includes search terms on the challenges in case study preparation in a humanitarian or a logistical context. Subject linkage level III only includes search terms that refer to general difficulties in case study research (without reference to a specific research area). Table 3 shows the number of results per database for the search with subject linkage level III.

The final results of the research process, according to the three levels of subject linkage, are presented in Table 4.

A total of eight scientific articles Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 211 Table 3 Search results by database for subject linkage level III Number of results (all search fields) Number of results (only title) Potential results (screening) Final results 4 4 35 1 1 86 1 0a 0 0 0 0 0 0 Academic search complete (08.12.2019) 18,417 73 Business source complete (08.12.2019) 8,417 Science direct (10.12.2019) 58,929 Emerald insight (10.12.2019) 1 IEEE Xplore (10.12.2019) 0 a The potential result was already included in final results of the EBCSO databases Table 4 Results of literature review according to the level of subject linkage Subject linkage level Explanation Final results Number I Sources examining case study research challenges in humanitarian logistics Vega (2008) 1 II Sources in which case study research challenges in related fields (logistics without humanitarian reference or humanitarian sector without reference to logistics) are examined Duboisa and Araujo (2007), Wood (2006) 2 III Sources that examine case study research challenges in other areas and without reference to a specific area of logistics Eisenhardt and Graebner (2007), Ishak and Bakar (2014), Lloyd-Jones (2003), Malterud (2001), McCharthy et al.

(2003) 5 were identified and considered in this study. The last step, the presentation of results, takes place in Sect. 4, where the relevant literature is analyzed and interpreted. 3.2 Expert Interviews Qualitative research is generally suitable for exploratory studies in which a phenomenon has not been fully researched. It is, therefore, suitable for investigating the challenges of case study research in the context of humanitarian logistics. The 212 C. Hein et al.

researchers are supported in their development of a comprehensive and detailed picture of the complex phenomenon. The qualitative research interview attempts to describe the meanings of central issues in the subjects’ environments. The main task of the interview is to understand the meaning of the respondents’ statements (Kvale 1996).

With regard to standardization, interviews are divided into unstructured, semi-structured, and structured interviews, whereas in qualitative research, only the latter forms of standardization are common. For semi-structured interviews, an interview guide is prepared in advance. Corbetta (2003) states that the order in which the different topics are dealt with is left to the interviewer. Within the topic complexes, the questions can also be formulated at the interviewer’s discretion.

It is possible to ask additional questions that are not foreseeable at the beginning of the interview. It is not the primary goal of semi-structured interviews to test hypotheses. Rather, the aim is to explore the opinions of the interviewee (Gray 2004). In this paper, qualitative expert interviews were applied, since this enables access to the knowledge of researchers who have experience in conducting case studies in the context of humanitarian logistics.

The semi-structured form was chosen because its flexibility is suitable for application in this relatively unestablished research field. The guidelines used for the interviews followed the procedure proposed by Bell (2014). A total of five sets of questions were formed. The first set of questions deals with the context of humanitarian logistics, with the following set addressing challenges that the interviewee experienced in the case study research.

In the third set of questions, the experts are asked to explain possible recommendations for action to overcome the challenges mentioned. The fourth set of questions seeks to structure the diversity of the identified problems. Questions regarding the categorization of challenges are formulated. The last set of questions summarizes the identified recommendations. The primary research question, as well as the interview course, was communicated to the experts in advance.

This allows the interviewees the opportunity to prepare for the interview. With regard to the selection of experts, intensive research was carried out using publicly available information on the experts in advance. A precondition for contacting the expert was that the researchers had expertise in the field of humanitarian logistics and case study research. The number of publications and citations on this topic were used as references.

Six expert interviews were conducted in total; with this number of experts a theoretical saturation could be achieved. All interviewees work at different universities in four European countries. They all have scientific expertise on the topic. The number of publications ranges from seven to several hundred, with the number of citations ranging from twenty to several thousand. Four of the six experts have additional practical experience.

All interviews took place at the end of 2019 either via Skype or WhatsApp. On average, the interviews, which were conducted in English, lasted around fifty minutes, with the lengthiest interview lasting ninety and the shortest around thirty minutes (c.f. Table 5). The interviews were then transcribed. A qualitative content analysis was conducted to evaluate the interview data.

The basic concept of qualitative content analysis, according to Mayring (2002) is to assign predefined or emerging codes to text material systematically. Coding allows Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 213 Table 5 Overview of experts interviewed Research area Practical experience Number of publications Interview date Medium Duration Expert 1 SCM, social responsibility, humanitarian logistics Yes 10–24 04.11.2019 Skype 90 min.

Expert 2 Business ethics, marketing management, humanitarian logistics Yes 10–24 12.11.2019 Skype 36 min. Expert 3 SCM, disaster management, humanitarian logistics Yes <10 11.11.2019 WhatsApp 44 min. Expert 4 SCM, humanitarian logistics, procurement – 25–49 21.11.2019 Skype 32 min. Expert 5 Humanitarian logistics, warehousing, information sharing Yes 25–49 25.11.2019 Skype 62 min. Expert 6 Closed-loop logistics, sustainable logistics, humanitarian logistics – >100 25.11.2019 Skype 28 min.

for the possibility to categorize data as it organizes the data by concepts, key ideas, or topics. This implies that coding is not only the analysis but also the interpretation of the data (Recker 20132014). Corbin and Strauss (1990) distinguish between three different coding techniques: open, axial, and selective. Selective coding, which was used in this current work, is used to put identified categories into a superordinate context. The goal is to develop a coherent category scheme.

The coding and evaluation were performed using the software tool MAXQDA 2020. The results of both the analysis of the literature and the interviews are presented in the following section. The challenges of case study research will be illustrated by means of the distinctive characteristics of humanitarian logistics. The recommendations for action are outlined and clearly presented according to the individual phases of the research process (stated in Sect. 2.2). 214 C. Hein et al.

4 Results 4.1 It’s (Still) Case Study Research The method of case study research in the context of humanitarian logistics certainly comprises particular challenges. However, the experts surveyed also agreed that the challenges in applying this case study research cannot be attributed solely to the humanitarian context but can be described as inherent difficulties of this method.

Expert 6 remarks that “it might, in general, be not entirely different to other case study research, but it would certainly have to deal with [complex] characteristics”. Expert 5 agrees with this thesis. Therefore, many of the challenges mentioned in the interviews and the literature can be classified as general challenges of case study research. The main issue pointed out was that in the application of the case study methodology, it is mainly the diversity of definitions that poses a problem.

A lack of differentiation from other methods, such as interview studies, for example, can be seen here (“You cannot just pick up the phone and ask a few short interviews”, Expert 5). Furthermore, a lack of rigor is identified as a key problem, which has given case study research a bad reputation. Expert 6 criticized that “ninety percent of case study research, in general, is […] bad; that is just not good research”.

In particular, the lack of theoretical foundation, as well as the arbitrary adaptation of the researchers’ own methodologies and the lack of information on the research process (e.g. in terms of the case selection), were mentioned (Vega 2018). Expert 4 states, in this context, that “case study research is taken too lightly”. Another obstacle is that certain circumstances make it challenging to publish case studies in scientific journals (Experts 1, 3, and 4).

The limitation of the word count can be mentioned here (“‘Shrink it just [to] two lines and then focus on the results!’ I do not think that this is the best way”, Expert 1). General recommendations for action, which in their nature are certainly not unique to the context of humanitarian logistics, were given by the interviewed experts.

The conscious application of case studies as research methodology and the theoretical foundation, including a definition, should precede the entire research process. In particular, a clear distinction from other related research methods such as interview studies is claimed.

“Sometimes people just do like a case and they think it is case study research without really taking into account what kind of question they want to answer, and what kind of case they’re looking at, and what kind of conclusions they can make (Expert 4). Besides, adherence to methodological rigor throughout the entire research process is elementary, as “there is enough literature on how you should do things properly, in terms of methodology” (Expert 6).

Standard literature on the topic should be consulted and supplemented by further literature (Expert 1), such as the framework of Vega (2018). To meet the challenges of publishing, a mixedmethods approach (e.g. combining qualitative interviews with quantitative surveys) was recommended (Expert 5). All these points influence the researcher across all phases (c.f. Sect. 2.2).

In the following, it will be outlined which particularities of Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 215 the humanitarian context have an influence on the conduction of case studies and how to address them. 4.2 It’s Dynamic A distinctive feature of humanitarian logistics is the dynamic and volatile environment (Beamon and Balcik 2008; van Wassenhove 2006). This applies both to the occurrence of a disaster itself and to the humanitarian actors.

This dynamic poses several challenges that influence case study research. Humanitarian operations often have a project character; they can be initiated ad hoc and take place under time pressure and with limited financial resources. Dealing with these dynamics in the context of case study research is sometimes difficult, as long-term planning is not always possible. On the other hand, time windows for data collection can be indefinite and small.

All this leads to the fact that the effort of case study research in this environment should not be underestimated: “It will take more work to get to the level when you can actually start seeing things, so we understand that phenomenon that we are looking at” (Expert 5). In contrast, the researcher’s time, and also the funds available, are often limited (Experts 1 and 6). Besides, there is the problem of the right time for data collection.

Collecting the data on-site and in close temporal contact with the actual event can be useful from a methodological point of view. Still, unfortunately, it is not always practicable (Expert 1). The dynamics in humanitarian aid, however, do not only relate to the event of the disaster itself; the humanitarian actors are also quite dynamic. A high staff turnover poses particular challenges (Sandwell 2011), which also have an impact on the implementation of a case study.

On the one hand, there is the challenge of assigning individual items from interviews to a particular humanitarian organization. “It is very difficult because each person that you interview, they will have worked in so many different organizations and so many different positions and places. […] How do you make sure what they say is really for this organization?” (Expert 5).

On the other hand, it can be challenging if the interviewee is no longer working in the same organization throughout the duration of the study. In addition, aid organizations often lack explicit logistics knowledge on the part of their staff, and there is little imagination regarding the application of theoretical models in practice (“[…] people that take decisions, that take operational decision, are not necessarily logisticians and they might not have been trained in logistics […]”, Expert 4).

Table 6 provides an overview of the challenges mentioned. The challenges posed by the dynamic environment of humanitarian operations influence different phases of conducting case studies. The interviewed experts have identified some approaches to dealing with them. When planning a case study on humanitarian logistics, the inherent dynamics of the environment should be taken into account.

This means that more flexibility on the part of the researcher’s time should be included from the beginning (Experts 1 and 5). There are further reasons for this (see Sects. 4.4 and 4.5). For certain temporary research projects, e.g. within the framework of a master’s program, the use of the case study as a research methodology 216 C. Hein et al.

Table 6 Challenges caused by dynamics and recommendations for action Challenges Phase Recommendations for action Dynamic Long-term research processes in the (1) humanitarian context Limited time and funds for research Small and indefinite time windows for data collection Choosing the right time for interviews (2) High fluctuation of staff in the humanitarian sector (3) Lack of explicit logistics knowledge in humanitarian organizations Long-term time planning for case study process Apply for funds at an early stage Build networks within the humanitarian sector Use appropriate language in interviews Abstract the statements made in the interviews Link answers in interviews with specific organization/experience might not be appropriate.

Expert 1 considers it a more suitable methodology for advanced research programmers, such as PhDs. The high turnover of staff also has an impact on the planning process of a case study. It is recommended that a network of potential interview partners be established as early as possible. “If you have those networks, I think that is very valuable” (Expert 5). Regarding the lower level of logistics knowledge in humanitarian organizations, an appropriate language level should be applied.

It is ultimately the task of the researcher to abstract the statements made in an interview to a scientific level (Expert 1). The recommended actions are summarized in Table 6. 4.3 It’s Political Humanitarian aid operations always take place in a certain political context. This is particularly true of conflict-based disasters. This area of tension has to be dealt with within the context of case study research (Wood 2006).

Access to the objects of study might be made more difficult for political reasons and due to strong regulations. “Governmental organizations are very restricted and very regulated. It is hard to get into its data if you do not have access to contacts” (Expert 2). In some instances, security aspects even make this access impossible. Consideration should also be given to the question of who can collect data in such areas.

“I would not want someone, when he just has research and academic experience, to go to Iraq and start asking questions to the different actors that are typically in the field. That has some constraints and implications that can be very difficult to manage” (Expert 3). As explained in the previous section, this can also lead to an extension of the research project.

Furthermore, especially in security-related contexts, a high level of sensitivity with regard to data protection is required (Experts 1 and 2). This leads to challenges in the process of data collection as well as in reporting.

Furthermore, the political dimension should not be underestimated within interviews, as political circumstances Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 217 Table 7 Challenges caused by political issues and recommendations for action Political Challenges Phase Recommendations for Action Difficult physical access due to political restrictions and regulations Security aspects of conflict-based disasters High-level data security aspects Influence of political circumstances on interview responses Intra- and inter-organizational power structure (1) Take political circumstances into account at an early stage of planning (2) Compliance with data protection Involvement of different organizational entities Critical attitude towards political issues in interviews (3) Critical attitude towards political issues in the evaluation of date Triangulation can influence people’s responses.

“Humanitarian Logistics is politics. So you always have a political filter on it, so if you’re going to approach an organization you know there would always be people who are either […] scared of the political system and they don’t dare to say anything or they are not allowed to say anything” (Expert 5). The intra- and inter-organizational power structure should also not be neglected. An overview of the challenges raised by the political environment are summarized in Table 7.

Politically unstable circumstances influence the implementation of case studies. During the preparation phase, attention should be paid to this, and an awareness of the emotional requirements should be encouraged (Wood 2006). In addition, under certain circumstances, priority should be given to experienced researchers for data collection. An intensive examination of the political context is necessary here. Respect for sensitive data should always be ensured.

This refers to the phase of case study planning as well as the phases of data collection and reporting (Experts 1 and 2). The political dimension in the context of interviews should not be neglected. An intensive examination in advance helps to ask differentiated questions (“You have to be very specific in your questions”, Expert 5). A critical attitude should be adopted during the interview and also during the evaluation (Expert 6).

In particular, a strong triangulation of the data should be emphasized as a useful tool. The comparison of different statements that were made at various times as well as a comparison with other sources and data helps to create facts. To ensure the reliability of the data, different organizational entities (management level, field workers) can be consulted on the same issue. The evaluation of the collected data material thus can identify contradictions or confirmations.

Expert 6 summarizes it as follows: “You have to be very critical and very often ask the same questions several times in a different way or at a different time or ask different people and triangulate”. An overview can be found in Table 7. 218 C. Hein et al. 4.4 It’s International Major humanitarian relief missions take place in a highly international context. Up to several hundred organizations from dozens of different countries (Chia 2007) can come together in such operations.

Moreover, aid workers can come from different countries and operate in a cultural environment that might be unfamiliar to them and with people whose language they may not speak. This international context also presents challenges for case study research. First and foremost, it makes physical access to data more difficult. Researchers cannot travel to any place in the world to collect data as often as they like. “The problem is time at least for us [researchers].

For me, it is time that I do not have time to go and have access just [to] find [people in the field]” (Expert 1). Different languages pose a challenge, especially in interviews. Cultural differences should not be ignored either and may well influence answers and should, therefore, also be taken into account when evaluating data.

Expert 6 mentions jargon as another specificity of humanitarian logistics: “[…] the humanitarian world uses an awful lot of jargon […] and understanding each other is very difficult”. Expert 6 goes on to explain that this jargon can not only vary between different organizations, but also within an organization where “they use different words and different concepts for the same thing”. In contrast to the commercial sector, there is rarely a common understanding of concepts or terms.

Table 8 summarizes the challenge caused by international aspects. According to the interviewed experts, certain challenges regarding the strong internationality of humanitarian logistics can be met within the framework of case study research. Regarding the difficult physical access to data, Expert 6 suggests co-operating with local researchers or partners. At the same time, this improves the handling of other challenges.

The language barrier in the interview survey may already be solved, and the difficulty of putting the content into the right local and cultural context is thus reduced, because “they know the language, they know the local conditions” (Expert 6). The influences of such cooperation extend across all phases of the implementation of case studies. Thus, attention should be paid to this already in the planning phase; positive effects can be achieved in the phases of both data collection and evaluation.

To meet the challenge of the different terms and concepts, Expert 5 recommends that intensive preparation takes place: “I think you need to be very well prepared. You need to understand all of this very well”. Table 8 provides an overview of the recommendations for action.

Table 8 Challenges caused by international issues and recommendations for action International Challenges Phase Recommendations for Action Difficulties regarding physical access Language barriers Cultural differences Humanitarian jargon: variety of terms and concepts (1)–(4) Working together with local researchers or partners Preparation across all stages of the research process Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 219 4.5 It’s Complex The final characteristic of humanitarian logistics which is mentioned in both literature and the expert interviews is its complexity.

The interaction of a dynamic environment with many different stakeholders, the strong influence of political, social, and cultural aspects, and the internationality in which humanitarian aid takes place create an extremely high degree of complexity. On the one hand, this degree of complexity is a strong argument for the application of qualitative methods such as case study research.

On the other hand, the complexity of the humanitarian context also creates various challenges that need to be addressed. The various aspects of complexity cannot be ignored in the context of a case study. The completeness of the researcher’s perspective is particularly important and is one of the strengths of a case study. “First of all, you need to know the context” (Expert 5).

Expert 6 states that when “you make a model […] that ignores safety in an area where you have a lot of fighting going on […] your recommendations will be wrong because you ignored one of the most important things, which is security”. The challenges already arise in the preparation of a case study, especially the case selection and the corresponding definition of case boundaries, which is highlighted by the experts.

The structuring of large and complex data sets is a challenge in the analysis phase (“The amount of data that you get are also very complex to sort out”, Expert 2). In reporting, care should be taken to ensure that the complexity is sufficiently represented. A low degree of generalization and the difficulty of making comparisons can be the consequence here.

“In a normal environment [you already] have to be careful about […] comparing results and generalizing from them, which I think that is also true for your regular case study research”. In the humanitarian context, “it might just be an order of magnitude more complicated” (Expert 6). In Table 9 an overview of the context-related challenges can be found.

Adequately addressing the numerous aspects of complexity is probably the most significant challenge in case study research on humanitarian logistics (“the humanitarian context got to be very complex and dynamic and it has a lot of stakeholders and different objectives and so on”, Expert 6).

The experts were also able to give individual recommendations for action here, covering the various phases of the case Table 9 Challenges caused by complexity and recommendations for action Challenges Phase Recommendations for Action Complex The context of humanitarian logistics (1) in general is very complex Various aspects of complexity You need to understand the context very precisely There might be a large amount of data Low degree of generalization and (2) comparison (3) Address aspects of complexity from the beginning Special attention paid to case selection and boundaries Experience in both academia and practice Scientific discourse with colleagues Address aspects of complexity adequately 220 C. Hein et al.

study research process. When selecting the cases in the planning phase, Expert 1 notes that special attention should be paid to the case boundaries. Also, with regard to the evaluation and the presentation of results, particular emphasis should be placed on the adequate description of the complex interrelationships.

Gaining experience both in academia and in practice has also been mentioned as an advantage (“I definitely think working inside an organization would make it easier”, Expert 5) and certainly contributes to a better understanding of complex interrelations. Furthermore, Expert 6 recommends entering into scientific discourse with colleagues consciously. An overview of the recommendations for action can be found in Table 9.

5 Conclusions This thesis aimed to produce an overview of the challenges in case study research in the context of humanitarian logistics. For this reason, it was examined how experts from the scientific community discuss the issue. In particular, the following research questions were addressed: What are the challenges in conducting a case study, especially in the context of humanitarian logistics? How can these challenges be categorized?

How can these challenges be addressed when carrying out a case study in the context of humanitarian logistics? To answer these questions, the first step was to lay the theoretical foundations for the topics of humanitarian logistics and case study research. This was followed by a description of the applied research methods of literature review and expert interviews. Subsequently, the challenges and corresponding recommendations for action were outlined in the results section of the paper.

This was done based on the characteristics of humanitarian logistics. In summary, the research results show that the fundamental challenges of case study design relate to the lack of methodological knowledge. The lack of understanding exists at a macro (in the general scientific community) and micro (in relation to the individual scientist) level.

In addition, the requirements of scientific journals and the bad reputation that the case study method is wrongly attributed make case study development difficult. Four characteristics of humanitarian logistics can describe the specific challenges posed by the particularity of the humanitarian context: first, the dynamic and volatile environment contributes to difficulties. Next, the political, as well as the international context, have to be mentioned.

Finally, the high degree of complexity contributes to the fact that unique challenges in case study research in humanitarian logistics cause difficulties. These challenges relate to the different phases of the implementation of a case study.

The most important recommendations for action include adherence to methodological rigor throughout the research process, early preparation with regard to financial and time planning, building a network, cooperation with local actors and researchers, promoting confidence-building, formulating questions for specific target groups, critically examining the data material, investigating possible misjudgments, Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 221 applying the triangulation approach, establishing a methodological distance, understanding methods for structuring the complex data set, obtaining advice from research colleagues, and using mixed methods.

Further research is necessary regarding the specific design of the developed recommendations for action and their systematization within the framework of a detailed procedural model. In this context, quality criteria for case studies in humanitarian logistics could be derived. These would serve both as an assistance for researchers during the implementation and for the subsequent assessment of the quality. A comparison with other research areas is also possible.

However, the main purpose of this work is to encourage and support researchers in conducting case studies in the context of humanitarian logistics and to improve their quality. Limitations regarding the validity of the results arise from the research methodology chosen. Despite careful consideration of the method, a bias in the results due to the subjective interpretation of the data cannot be excluded.

The completeness of the research results cannot be guaranteed due to the high complexity and diversity of humanitarian logistics. Furthermore, the challenges identified here and the corresponding recommendations for action only refer to the specifics in the humanitarian context. For a detailed description of the methodological approach and general advice on case study research, explicit reference is made to the corresponding literature.

Finally, it should be noted that research on challenges in case study research in the humanitarian logistics context still requires further research. It is certainly possible to supplement the identified recommendations for action. Nevertheless, the strategies identified in this paper can be used to support researchers advancing humanitarian logistics research. References Apte A (2009) Humanitarian logistics: A new field of research and action.

Found Trends Technol Inf Oper Manag 3(1):1–100 Balcik B, Beamon BM, Krejci CC, Muramatsu KM, Ramirez M (2010) Coordination in humanitarian relief chains: practices, challenges and opportunities. Int J Prod Econ 126(1):22–34 Beamon BM, Balcik B (2008) Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. Int J Public Sector Manag 21(1):4–25 Bell J (2014) Doing your research project: a guide for first-time researchers, 4th edn.

Open University Press, Berkshire Blecken A (2009) A reference task model for supply chain processes of humanitarian organisations. PhD thesis. Universität Paderborn. https://d-nb.info/99978434X/34. Accessed 23 Mar 2018 Chia E (2007) Engineering disaster relief.

IEEE Technol Soc Mag 26(3):24–29 Chiappetta Jabbour J, Sobreiro A, de Sousa Lopes, Jabbour B, de Souza Campos M, Mariano B, Renwick S (2019) An analysis of the literature on humanitarian logistics and supply chain management: paving the way for future studies. Ann Oper Res 283:289–307 Corbetta P (2003) Social research theory, methods and techniques. Sage, London Corbin J, Strauss A (1990) Grounded theory research: Procedures, canons and evaluative criteria.

Qual Sociol 13(1):3–21 CRED (2019) Natural disasters 2018. https://emdat.be/publications. Accessed 5 Mar 2020 222 C. Hein et al. Dubois A, Araujo L (2007) Case research in purchasing and supply management: opportunities and challenges. J Purch Supply Manag 13(1):170–181 Eisenhardt K, Graebner M (2007) Theory building in purchasing and supply management: opportunities and challenges. Acad Manag J 50(1):25–32 Fink A (2014) Conducting research literature reviews: from the internet to paper, 4th edn.

Sage, Los Angeles Gray E (2004) Doing research in the real world. Sage, London Hein C (2019) Systematization of humanitarian NGOs from a logistical viewpoint: an exploratory study in Germany. In: Logistics management, proceedings of the German Academic Association for Business Research, Halle, 2019, pp 221–237 Hein C, Behrens F, Lasch R (2020) Insights on the costs of humanitarian logistics: a case study analysis.

Logist Res 13(3):1–17 Holguín-Veras J, Jaller M, van Wassenhove LN, Pérez N, Wachtendorf T (2012) On the unique features of post-disaster humanitarian logistics. J Oper Manag 30(7–8):494–506 Ishak N, Bakar A (2014) Developing sampling frame for case study. Challenges and conditions. World J Educ 4(3):29–35 Jahre M, Jensen L-M (2010) Coordination in humanitarian logistics through clusters.

Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manag 40(8/9):657–674 Karmasin M, Ribing R (2012) Die Gestaltung wissenschaftlicher Arbeiten: Ein Leitfaden für Seminararbeiten, Bachelor-, Master- und Magisterarbeiten sowie Dissertationen, 7th edn. Facultas, Wien Kovács G, Spens KM (2007) Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations. Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manag 37(2):99–114 Kovács G, Spens KM (2009) Identifying challenges in humanitarian logistics.

Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manag 39(6):506–528 Kunz N, Reiner G (2012) A meta-analysis of humanitarian logistics research. J Humanit Logist Supply Chain Manag 2(2):116–147 Kvale S (1996) Interviews: an introduction to qualitative research interviewing. Sage, London Lloyd-Jones G (2003) Design and control issues in qualitative case study research. Int J Qual Methods 2(2):33–42 Malterud K (2001) Qualitative research: standards, challenges, and guidelines.

Qual Res Ser 358(1):483–488 Mayring P (2002) Einführung in die qualitative Sozialforschung: Eine Anleitung zu qualitativem Denken, 5th edn. Beltz, Weinheim Basel McCharthy J, Holland J, Gillies V (2003) Multiple perspectives on the family lives of young people: methodology and theoretical issues in case study research. Int J Soc Res Methodol 6(1):1–23 Merriam S (1998) Qualitative research and case study applications in education.

Jossey-Bass, San Francisco Oloruntoba R, Gray R (2006) Humanitarian aid: an agile supply chain? Supply Chain Manag Int J 11(2):115–120 Ragin C (1992) Cases of what is a case? In: What is a case? Exploring the foundations of social inquiry. University Press, Cambridge Recker J (2013) Scientific research in information systems: a beginner’s guide. Springer, Berlin Sandwell C (2011) A qualitative study exploring the challenges of humanitarian organisations.

J Humanit Logist Supply Chain Manag 1(2):132–150 Schulz SF, Blecken A (2010) Horizontal cooperation in disaster relief logistics: benefits and impediments. Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manag 40(8/9):636–656 Stake E (1995) The art of case study research. Sage, Thousand Oaks Thomas A, Kopczak LR (2005) From logistics to supply chain management: the path in humanitarian sector. http://www.fritzinstitute.org/pdfs/whitepaper/fromlogisticsto.pdf.

Accessed 5 Mar 2020 UNHCR (2020a) Population statistics database. http://popstats.unhcr.org/en/overview. Accessed 5 Mar 2020 Case Study Research in Humanitarian Logistics … 223 UNHCR (2020b) Syria emergency. https://www.unhcr.org/syria-emergency.html. Accessed 5 Mar 2020 van Wassenhove LN (2006) Humanitarian aid logistics: supply chain management in high gear.

J Oper Res Soc 57(5):475–489 vom Brocke J, Simons A, Niehaves B, Riemer K, Plattfaut R, Cleven A (2009) Reconstructing the giant: on the importance of rigour in documenting the literature search process. In: ECIS 2009 Proceedings, 161. http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2009/161. Accessed 6 Mar 2020 Vega D (2018) Case studies in humanitarian logistics research.

J Humanit Logist Supply Chain Manag 8(2):134–152 Webster J, Watson T (2002) Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing a literature review. MIS Q 26(2):13–24 Wood E (2006) The ethical challenges of field research in conflict zones. Qual Sociol 9(1):373–386 Yazan B (2015) Three approaches to case study methods in education: Yin, Merriam, and Stake. Qual Rep 20(2):134–152 Yin R (2003) Case study research: design and methods, 3rd edn.

Sage, Los Angeles Yin R (2009) Case study research: design and methods, 4th edn.

Sage, Los Angeles P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization of Distribution Plans: A Case of United Nations Humanitarian Response Depots Eligüzel İbrahim Miraç and Özceylan Eren Abstract The United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD) is a global network of depots located in Ghana, Italy, UAE, Malaysia, Spain, and Panama that procures, manages and transports emergency supplies for the humanitarian community.

Managed by the World Food Programme (WFP), UNHRD enables humanitarian actors to pre-position and stockpile relief items and support equipment for swift delivery in emergency situations. According to WFP, 515 different distributions (2,420,258 km in total) are actualized from six UNHRD depots to 88 countries in 2018 to provide 27343 m3 volume products.

Due to working for humanitarian events, maximization of users covered and also minimization of traveled distance have to be taken into consideration for UNHRD network. To do so, two different mathematical models namely maximum coverage and P-median are applied to UNHRD network using the distribution data in 2018. Total traveled distance of 515 shipments is minimized using P-median model and number of covered countries is determined under different distance limits using maximum coverage model.

As a result of P-median, the total distance has decreased to 1,003,473 km by 59%. In addition, different scenarios are applied in order to maximize total demand for several coverage areas. Keywords Humanitarian response depot · Location-allocation · Maximum coverage · P–median · UNHRD 1 Introduction Improving network design to reduce response time is critical for humanitarian logistics.

Humanitarian logistics is about mitigation, preparedness (preparing for disaster including developing competence, prepositioning of stocks etc. ), response (during E. İbrahim Miraç (B) · Ö. Eren Department of Industrial Engineering, Gaziantep University, Gaziantep, Turkey e-mail: miraceliguzel@gmail.com Ö. Eren e-mail: erenozceylan@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_15 225 226 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren a disaster), and recovery (getting back to normal state) (Duran et al. 2013). Typical assistance required in the aftermath of a disaster to stabilize a community after search and rescue is temporary shelter, health support, water and sanitation, food and cooking equipment.

The initial goal of humanitarian logistic is to provide search and rescue, shelter, health support and fundamental supplies to live. Most of the humanitarian offices (HOs) tries to achieve both long and short-term operations, in which it is required to manage different supply chains with different warehouses and it ideally should be needed integration of more than one to incline response time and total operating cost (Jahre et al. 2016).

Considering the mentioned expects, several locationallocation problems can be applied such as P-median and maximum coverage problems. The location problem which seeks to find p facility locations among other nodes to minimize the total distance (or cost) between all demands and their nearest warehouse is expressed as the P-median problem (Serra and Marianov 1998).

Maximum coverage problem can be considered as finding the minimum number of warehouse to cover all demand point or to maximize the number of points covered by a given number of warehouses (Daskin 1982, 1983). In 2018, it is estimated that 206.4 million people will be in need due to conflicts in Syria, Yemen and the Democratic Republic of the Congo lead to suffering and promote to the record numbers of migration (Global Humanitarian Assistance 2019).

To address the aforementioned objectives, it is examined the one of the HOs called as UNHRD shipments. UNHRD is a global network of hubs which includes procures storage and transporting emergency supplies continuously to the humanitarian community (The United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD) 2018).

In addition, UNHRD has six hubs which are strategically located globally, in Italy (Brindisi), Ghana (Accra), Malaysia (Kuala Lumpur), Panama (Panama City), Spain (Las Palmas) and the United Arab Emirates (Dubai). Given six locations for hubs are decided with respect to diversity of transportation and its closeness to areas in need. After the emergency situation, it is required to correspond quickly and supplying a demand consistently.

In order to achieve the quick response and consistent supply, uncertain travel times is proposed by deciding the interval of values which is solved by application of robust optimization methods due to guarantee whole determined routes are feasible under the uncertain parameters with predetermined uncertainty set (Balcik and Yanıkoğlu 2020). Another significant issue is the decision making because of facility allocation requirement under different scenarios right after disasters.

In order to manage facility allocation after disasters, decision making tool through the spreadsheet developed, which consists of three main parts as; database, decision engine and user interface (Cavdur et al. 2020). In addition, it can be tried to add new facilities in order to achieve cost benefit. One of the examples is adding a new to UNHRD in Kampala and Uganda in East Africa by implementing simulation, network optimization and statistical analyses (Dufour et al. 2018).

Another approach to facility allocation proposed by implementing the two-stage stochastic model in order to save from cost and expected total transportation cost especially for temporary medical centers (Oksuz et al. 2020). In addition, there are some heuristic applications by utilizing maximum covering model and one of them is modified genetic algorithm which is applied on locating Malaysia health care facilities in one district (Shariff et al. 2012).

P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 227 After disaster, victims require the supplies to pursue vital activities and some of them need an immediate assistance such as delivery of medical supply. Therefore, relief network design is presented for pharmaceutical items by applying bi-objective minmax robust model by considering the perishability of item, mobility of facilities and benefits from the cooperative coverage mechanism (Akbarpour et al. 2020).

There are several mathematical models that applied on humanitarian logistics. In order to understand mathematical models for humanitarian logistics, the study is conducted which includes details on goals, constraints, and structures of available mathematical models with solution approaches (Özdamar and Ertem 2015).

In this chapter, the main objective is to provide shortest time response to emergency calls and the applying aforementioned models (P-median and Maximum coverage) to solve HO-related location problems in order to minimize the time required for meet with demand or minimizing the distance between a demand point and its nearest warehouse. To the best knowledge of authors this is the first study that implements P-median and maximum coverage problems to UNHRD. Structure of this chapter is as follows.

Firstly, models and application part is presented, which includes the general information about the case and formulation of models. Secondly, Applications of models are given and results demonstrated. Finally, conclusion is given. 2 Case and Mathematical Models UNHRD are logistics hubs strategically placed close to disaster-prone areas across the world which is given in Fig. 1 (Ireland & The UN Humanitarian Response Fig.

1 A map of six hubs 228 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Depot 2020) in order to provide quick response and readiness in the case of emergency. These hubs and information about the hubs are given as (United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot 2020): 1-Ghana (Accra) The hub in Accra is placed in the Kotoka International Airport and located to support emergency situation specifically for the West and Central African regions.

2-Italy (Brindisi) UNHRD in Brindisi has significant place in emergency support and response worldwide, which founded in 2000 3-Spain (Las Palmas) In 2014, UNHRD in Las Palmas is the new addition to the UNHRD Network in order to support the World Food Programme’s Ebola response operations, which utilized as a transshipment and staging. 4-Malaysia (Kuala Lumpur) The facilities provides open and closed storage space. Also, it facilitates cold storage and guest houses.

5-Panama (Panama City) The facilities provides open and closed storage space. Also, it facilitates cold storage and guest houses. 6-United Arab Emirates (Dubai) The facilities provides open and closed storage space. Also, it facilitates cold storage and guest houses. The aim of this study examines in which hubs and in which ways the demands of the countries in need of assistance in these events took place in 2018 were delivered by UNHRD and looking for an alternative route to the deliveries made.

It aims to provide services to people in need as soon as possible by planning to minimize the total transport distance. In order to achieve given objectives six hubs are placed which are demonstrated in Fig. 1. First of all, UNHRD 2018 activity reports have been used to determine which countries, with which transport type, how much volume of product and by which hub is sent.

Secondly, the distances between the delivering hubs and the delivering countries were calculated according to the type of transport. Air and land routes are calculated as kilometers on Google Maps. The sea route was calculated as nautical mile in seadistance.org and converted to kilometers. Finally, P-median and maximal coverage models were applied and the results were shown.

The shipment data from 2018 provide by the UNHRD totaled 578 records which are retrieved from the official web-site of UNHRD (The United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD) 2018). These data included the shipment volume, country, transportation type, partner, date, hubs, and other information. These data include 6 hubs, 91 countries and four different types of transport: air, sea, land and P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 229 multimodal.

Demand points of the countries, locations of hubs, distance between each country and each hub were calculated according to transportation type. Air and land transports were calculated in kilometers by using Google Maps. Sea distance was calculated as nautical mile on seadistance.org and converted to kilometers. Since 63 of 578 deliveries were delivered in a multimodal form, it is not included in proposed study due to lack of retrieving information.

Therefore, it is continued with 27343 m3 delivered to 88 countries by considering remaining 515 deliveries. Remaining data indicates 515 delivery volumes with 27343 cubic meters at total. With respect to Figs. 2 and 3 generated by retrieving data from (The United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD) 2018), 61% of the total volume is supplied from Dubai with 279 shipments, 20% from Accra with 91 deliveries, 18% from Fig. 2 Volume of each hub Fig.

3 Number of hubs shipment 230 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Fig. 4 Distribution of volumes by type of transportation Panama with 48 shipments (9%), Brindisi 65 shipment (7%), Kuala Lumpur 30 shipment (4.57%) and Las Palmas 2 shipment (0.43%). UNHRD delivered shipments with four different transportation types. Data of related figures (Figs. 4, 5) and tables (Table 1, 2, 3) gathered from UNHRD 2018 report (The United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD) 2018).

However, multimodal form is not utilized in this study. Therefore, it is conducted Fig.

5 Distribution of shipments by type of transportation Table 1 Number of shipment Countries reached Number of shipments Volume (m3 ) With multimodal 91 578 32463 Without multimodal 88 515 27343 Table 2 Volume of per shipment Land Total Number of shipment Air 224 221 70 515 Volume (m3 ) 8535.4 16112.2 2695.4 27343 38.10 72.91 38.51 Volume/Shipment Sea 53.09 P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 231 Table 3 Volume per hubs shipment Dubai Brindisi Accra Kuala Lumpur Panama Las Palmas Number of shipments 279 65 91 30 48 2 515 Volume (m3 ) 16683.90 1936.50 5357.70 1955.57 1290.34 119.59 27343.00 59.80 29.79 58.88 65.19 26.88 59.80 53.09 Volume/Shipment Total 3 different delivery methods as air, land and sea.

When total volume of deliveries are taken into consideration, it can be expressed from the Fig. 4 that 59% delivery managed by sea, 31% delivery managed by air and 10% delivery managed by land. The Table 3 shows the number of deliveries delivered by each hub and the total volume carried by each hub. Volume per delivery is calculated. Although 59% of the total volume was delivered by sea, 221 deliveries made by sea are accounted for 43% of 515 deliveries as it is shown in Fig. 5. From the Fig.

5 it can be expressed that contrary situation occurs in air delivery with 224 deliveries that is 43% of total number of delivery, but 31% of the volume was delivered by air. The remaining 71 deliveries were made by land (%13.8) and accounted for 10% of the volume. The Fig. 6 shows the distances of each hub’s deliveries. The distance of each delivery is calculated according to the mode of transportation. The distances of air and land deliveries are measured with Google Maps.

Measurements of sea deliveries are made with sea-distances.org. After all measurements have been completed, the total distance is found as 2420258.414 km. It have been seen that 70 deliveries is managed by land transport type in Fig. 5. These 70 deliveries take place in 18 different countries. The map in Fig. 7 shows deliveries is done by which hubs to which one of the 18 countries. Fig. 6 Total distance of hubs (km) 232 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Fig.

7 A map of land shipment 224 deliveries managed through Air transportation as it is demonstrated in Fig. 5. These 224 deliveries took place in 65 countries. The map in Fig. 8 shows which hubs meet the deliveries to presented countries by air shipments. It can be seen that there are 221 deliveries sent by Sea transport type in Fig. 5. These 221 deliveries took place in 71 different countries. The map in Fig. 9 shows which hub makes deliveries to which country.

2.1 Location-Allocation Models In this study, P-median and Maximal Coverage models are utilized. These models include delivery categories that consider hub locations, country delivery points, demand quantities, and objective function. The objective of facility location problems is to find a place to locate a facility in order to minimize the total setup cost and the total cost of transportation between clients and facilities.

The objective of P-median problem is to determine the locations of p facilities and their assigned clients in order to minimize the total cost of transportation between clients and facilities (Dantrakul et al. 2014). Covering problems are to find the minimum number of facilities to cover all clients or to maximize the number of clients covered by a given number of opened facilities. P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 233 Fig. 8 A map of air shipments Fig.

9 A map of sea shipments 2.1.1 P-median Model The p-median problem was introduced by Hakimi (1964). With the given number of p, the objective is to minimization of total transportation cost between clients and the p facilities. The uncapacitated P-median problem can be solved in polynomial time for fixed values of p but this problem is NP-hard for variable values of p (Garey et al. 234 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren 1990).

Many heuristics and exact methods have been proposed to solve the problem during 1979–2005, as reviewed by Mladenović et al. (2007). Methods for solving P-median problems are similar to methods for solving facility location problems such as variable neighborhood search (Hansen et al. 2009), simulated annealing (Brimberg and Drezner 2013), greedy heuristic (Almeida and Araujo 2010) and etc.

Sets and indices: i ∈ I set of demand note j ∈ J set of candidate facility k ∈ K set of transportation type Parameters: P = available number of facilities di jk = distance between locations i, j and k wi = weight of demand i Decisions Variables: y j = 1, i f potential hub j is opened (∀ j ∈ J ); 0 other wise xi jk = 1, i f countr y i assigned to hub j and transpor tation k (∀i ∈ I, ∀ j ∈ J, ∀k ∈ K ); 0other wise Objective Function: min Z =   j∈ j  i∈I k∈K di jk Wi x jik (1) ∀i ∈ I (2) Constraints:   j∈J k∈K x jik = 1 x jik ≤ y j ∀i ∈ I,  jε J ∀k ∈ K (3) y j =P y j , x jik ∈ {0.1} ∀i ∈ I, ∀ j ∈ J, (4) ∀k ∈ K (5) The objective function (1) minimizes the total demand-weighted distance between each demand node.

Constraint (2) requires each demand node i to be assigned to exactly one facility j and one transportation type k. Constraints (3) link the location variables (x j ) and the allocation variables (yi j ). They state that demands at node i can only be assigned to a facility at location j (yi j = 1) if a facility is located at node P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 235 j (x j = 1). Constraint (4) states that exactly p facilities are to be located.

Constraints (5) are the standard integrality conditions. 2.1.2 Maximal Coverage The maximal covering location problem (MCLP) considers the objective of locating a given number of facilities to maximize the covered number of demand nodes and demand nodes are expected be covered entirely if nodes are in the range of critical distance of the facility, otherwise it is assumed to be not covered (Karasakal and Karasakal 2004).

The optimal result of a MCLP is depends on pre-decided critical distance, decision on a critical distance value without altering coverage may lead “fully covered” to “not covered” and erroneous results. Therefore, it is allowed the coverage alter “covered” to “not-covered” in given range that is called as level partial coverage (Karasakal and Karasakal 2004).

In addition, mixed integer linear programming that aims to cover maximum demand and objective function which aims to cover maximum weighted demand by providing minimum average distance to uncovered demand is presented as the solution approaches (Haghani 1996). Maximum coverage model is also utilized in daily life areas such as deciding on location of stations.

One of the instances is bicycle sharing stations which utilizes the optimization that comprises the aim of maximizing covered demand and available budget as a constraint (Frade and Ribeiro 2015). Another instance is the placing the stations for university campus and it utilizes the model that has an objective of deciding coverage capability of pre-determined number of stations for demand points (Mete et al. 2018).

Moreover, Maximum coverage model is utilized for humanitarian logistic operation optimization. For instance, optimization of number of relief centers and their capacities is conducted for flood victims in Malaysia (Hashim et al. 2017).

Maximum Coverage model for this study is given as follows (Church and ReVELLE 1974): Sets and indices: I = the set of demand nodes J = the set of facility sites S = the distance beyond which a demand point is considered “uncovered” Ni { j ∈ J/di j ≤ S} the nodes j that are within a distance of S to node i Parameters: P = number of facilities di j = shortest distance between locations i, j ai = population to be served at demand node i Decisions Variables: ai = demand at node i 236 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren x j = 1 i f a f acilit y sited at the jth node (∀ ∈ J ); 0 other wise yi = 1 i f node i is cover ed by one or mor e within S; 0 other wise f acilitiesstationed Objective Function: max Z =  ai yi (6) xj (7) xj = p (8) i∈I Constraints: yi ≤   j∈J yi , x j ∈ {0, 1} j∈Ni ∀i ∈ I ∀j ∈ J (9) The objective function (6) maximizing the sum of covered elements in the sets in which they are covered.

Constraint (7) if yi > 0 then at least one set j ∈ Ni is selected. Constraint (8) states that exactly p facilities are to be located. The sign constraints are shown in Constraint (9). 3 Results In this section, distance between countries and each hub are examined and the result is gathered by using mathematical models (P-median and Maximal Coverage) described in the previous section. Finally, LINGO 14.0 software results and proposed mathematical model’s results are compared.

In this section, two different locationallocation models which are P-median and Maximal Coverage, applied to the UNHRD Logistics Service. The cases from Ghana (Accra), Italy (Brindisi), Spain (Las Palmas), Malaysia (Kuala Lumpur), Panama (Panama City), United Arab Emirates (Dubai) to 88 countries are considered. Distances from each of these six points to 88 countries were measured according to transport types. We took the run on a server with 3.00 GHz Intel Core processor and 2 GB of RAM.

The computation time required to solve the models are less than 10 s. P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 237 3.1 P-median Solution After obtaining distances from each hub to countries, P-median is implemented to assign UNHRD depots and demand points of countries by aiming the total transportation distance minimization. The obtained results of PMP by LINGO 14.0 are given in Tables 4, 5, 6 and illustrated in Figs. 10, 11, 12.

Table 2 demonstrates the situation before the application of P-median and Maximal Coverage which is 224 transports took place by air (a total volume of 8535.4 m3 and 38.1 m3 per shipment), 221 transports managed by sea (a total volume of 16112.2 m3 , and 72.91 m3 per shipment) and the remaining 70 transports are carried out by land (a total volume of 2695.4 m3 and 38.51 m3 per shipment).

When the results from application of p-median are analyzed, which is demonstrated in Table 4, it is seen that the number of deliveries for air transportation is increased by 32% and the number of deliveries for sea and land transportation are decreased by 7.23 and 80% respectively. Figures 7, 8, 9 illustrates the situation before the application of focused models. Initially, the longest distance in the distribution network is measured as 25789.1 km.

After applying the p-median model, this distance fell to 7719.4 km. The Fig. 10 shows 515 deliveries to 88 countries from each hubs after the implementing the pmedian model. Figure 10 also shows how many deliveries are made from each hub to each country. Initial total distance of the deliveries is measured as 2420258.414 km. As a result of the p-median model application, total distance of optimized deliveries is updated to 1003473.646 km by 58% decrease. Before the improvement, as it is shown in Fig.

3, the demands (279 deliveries) are mostly supplied by Dubai. However, most of the demands (206 deliveries) are supplied by Accra after improvement. In a nutshell, there is a significant change in activity of hubs. The considerable change is seen in Dubai hub activity. As a result of the model, a significant reduction in total distance has been achieved and deliveries are made from the hub to the closest requesting country. The number of deliveries carried by Accra has increased.

As it is shown in Fig. 12, the volume transported from Dubai decreased almost by half, while the volume transported from Accra doubled. Other hubs showed small changes. According to the results of our model presented in Table 6, the hub point that meets the demand of each country, the transportation point of the deliveries, the hub point that meets the demand, the distance between the country and finally the number of deliveries made to that country are indicated.

As it is expressed previously, there Table 4 P-median number of transportation and volume solution Transportation Number of shipment Volume (m3 ) Air 296 13409.8 45.3033 Sea 205 12927.7 63.0619 Land 14 1005.71 71.8364 Average volume 11823.57 Volume (m3 ) Average volume 57.396 206 392423.20 Distance Number of shipment Accra Transportation 68.515 127 8701.49 310868.66 Dubai 30.39 57 1732.42 46146.38 Brindisi Table 5 Average volumes of each shipment of hubs and distances 55.55 8 444.46 14530.80 Las Palmas 54.99 51 2804.92 125738.85 Kuala Lumpur 27.82 66 1836.32 113765.74 Panama 515 27343.21 1003473.64 Total 238 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Hub Dubai Accra Panama Brindisi Kuala Lumpur Panama Accra Kuala Lumpur Panama Accra Accra Accra Accra Accra Dubai Country Afghanistan Angola Antigua and Barbuda Armenia Bangladesh Barbados Benin Bhutan Brazil Burkina Faso Burundi C. African Rep. Cameron Chad Comoros Sea Sea Sea Sea Air Sea Air Sea Sea Air Sea Sea Air Air Sea Mode Table 6 P-median assignments 466.33 137.30 958.07 127.70 234.63 253.25 23.23 54.41 96.11 65.97 1752.17 41.80 23.75 11.83 65.67 Demand (m3 ) 4942.98 1111.20 1111.20 1111.20 3423.49 479.66 4435.20 2674.28 285.20 2216.82 2427.97 2572.42 2105.80 2190.22 1281.58 Distance (km) 4 8 8 4 6 6 2 3 3 3 22 1 2 1 5 # of Shipments Las Palmas Kuala Lumpur Accra Dubai Brindisi Brindisi Hub Palestinian Pakistan Nigeria Niger Namibia Myanmar Mozambique Mauritania Brindisi Dubai Accra Accra Accra Kuala Lumpur Accra Accra Marshall Island Kuala Lumpur Mali Malaysia Malawi Madagascar Liechtenstein Libyan Country Air Air Sea Sea Sea Sea Air Air Air Sea Air Air Air Sea Air Mode 0.01 4.75 1787.67 1411.12 20 9.83 266.30 22.52 0.18 132.98 119.82 23.57 67.41 0.37 271.42 Demand (m3 ) 1785 1887.70 394.47 285.20 3539.17 2146.46 4975.77 1095.80 7719.40 1553.82 1 4535.25 4928.80 1 977.83 Distance (km) (continued) 1 2 23 17 1 1 4 3 1 2 6 2 3 1 9 # of Shipments P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 239 Sea Land Congo Demo.

Accra Rep. Accra Panama Dubai Panama Panama Côte d’lvoire Cuba Djibouti Dominica Ecuador Air Air Air Air Air Accra Congo Mode Hub Country Table 6 (continued) 13.71 26.67 256.32 293.92 5.96 3463.13 103.30 Demand (m3 ) 1015 2118.66 1938.70 1592.90 536 1902.00 2033.48 Distance (km) 2 4 9 10 1 42 5 # of Shipments Sierre Leone Senegal Rwanda Philippines Peru Papua New Guinea Panama Country Accra Las Palmas Accra Kuala Lumpur Panama Kuala Lumpur Panama Hub Air Sea Air Air Air Sea Sea Mode 45.00 191.90 172.34 44.03 127.67 27.18 30.50 Demand (m3 ) 1475.91 1553.82 3469.44 2741 2557.7 5983.81 1 Distance (km) 2 4 12 3 5 2 9 # of Shipments 240 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 241 Fig.

10 P-median solution map Fig. 11 Distance of each hub are 515 deliveries which are not shown all in Table 6. From the results, it can be said that air transportation is the mostly used type, and the Accra is the hub where demand is mostly met. 242 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Fig. 12 Volume of hubs 3.2 Maximal Coverage Solution Humanitarian organizations should reach out to people in need around the world as much as possible.

UNHRD has embraced it and tries to reach every part of the world in minimum time. Minimization is done on the total distance of UNHRD 2018 deliveries by applying P-median. In this section, we applied 3 different distance constraints such as 3000, 4000 and 5000 km using UNHRD (2018) data and measured the total covered demand (Table 7).

Looking at the results prior to optimization, the total distance of 515 deliveries was calculated as 2420258.414 km and the average distance for each delivery was 4699.7 km. After the application of P-median, the total distance was calculated as 1003473.646 km and the average distance decreased to 1948.5 km. First of all, it is arranged retrieved data separately for maximal coverage model according to decided distance constraints. Firstly, distance constraint is set to 5000 km.

By LINGO 14.0 software application, it is observed that 27211.06 m3 of demand is met. The remaining 131.941 m3 and 6 countries are uncovered and the rate of uncovered countries is 7%. The uncovered countries are Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, South Africa, Marshall Islands, North Korea, and South Korea. Secondly, it is edited data by setting a 4000 km coverage area for the maximal coverage model. In this scenario, it is observed that 26219.445 m3 of our demand is met.

The remaining 1123.555 m3 demand and 12 countries are excluded. These Table 7 Maximal coverage solutions Coverage area (km) Total demand Meet demand (m3 ) Missing demand (m3 ) Number of covered country Number of uncovered country Uncovered rate (%) 3000 27343 23474.33 3868.66 69 19 22 4000 27343 26219.44 1123.55 76 12 14 5000 27343 27211.05 131.94 82 6 7 P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 243 Fig. 13 Maximal coverage assignments for 5000 km countries are shown in Fig. 14.

Finally, maximal coverage model is implemented with 3000 km coverage area. In final scenario, it is observed that 23474.336 m3 of demand is met. The remaining 3868.664 m3 demand and 19 countries are excluded. Unfortunately, rate of uncovered countries are consists of 22%.

The uncovered countries are Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, South Africa, Marshall Islands, North Korea, South Korea, Brazil, Comoros, Madagascar, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Burundi, Namibia, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, United States, and Zambia. As coverage distance declined, the country that is not covered increased dramatically. New solutions should be tried for this situation. These countries are shown in Fig. 15.

Figure 13 for 5000 km coverage area, purple colors indicate the countries covered by Panama. Also, green ones show Ghana, yellow ones indicate Italy, blue ones illustrate UAE, olive ones show Las Palmas de G.C and Gray ones Malaysia. Black dots indicate countries that cannot be assigned. As it can be seen from Fig. 13, 82 countries are covered and 6 are not covered. Figure 14 indicates the countries covered for 4000 km coverage, as in Fig. 13 the same colors represent the same hubs. From Fig.

14, it can be deducted that 76 countries are covered and 12 are not covered. Figure 15 indicates the countries covered and not covered for 3000 km coverage. In Fig. 15 69 countries are covered and 19 countries are not. 4 Conclusion The aim of this study is to minimize the total distances of 515 deliveries to 88 countries that request from 6 warehouses owned by UNHRD. These deliveries took place in 3 different ways: air, land and sea.

Data on deliveries are taken from the 2018 activity 244 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Fig. 14 Maximal coverage assignments for 4000 km Fig. 15 Maximal coverage assignments for 3000 km reports of UNHRD and the total distance of 515 deliveries is 2420258.414 km and the total volume is 27343 m3 . 224 of these deliveries were made by air and 8535.4 m3 of the volume was met in this way. 221 of the remaining deliveries were made by sea and 16112.2 m3 of the remaining volume was met.

Finally, 70 transports were realized by land and 2695.4 m3 of the total volume was met in this way. Firstly, distances from 6 hubs to 88 countries were measured on Google Maps and seadistance.org according to the delivery type. Secondly, P-median mathematical model is applied to the total distance and the demand’s longest by aiming distance minimization. As a result of Pmedian, our total distance from 2420258.414 km has decreased to 1003473.646 km.

P-median and Maximum Coverage Models for Optimization … 245 In this case, 296 of 515 deliveries were made by air and 13409.8 m3 of the total volume was met. 205 deliveries were made by sea and 12927.7 m3 of the total volume was met. The remaining 14 deliveries and 1005.71 m3 volume were provided by road. Finally, the Maximal Coverage model was applied in 3 different distances to increase the total covered demand.

A total of 69 countries were covered when 3000 km was applied and 23474.336 m3 of the total demand was met. When 4000 km is applied, 76 countries are covered and 26219.445 m3 of demand is met. When we reached 5000 km, 82 countries were covered and 27211.059 m3 of the total demand was met. In order to cover all countries and meet all the demand, 7719.4 km is required.

For the future studies, set covering approach should be implemented in order to see performance of other methods and location analysis can be conducted for new establishments for the hubs. Secondly, new locations for potential new hubs should be investigated using geographic information systems. Lastly, a web-based decision support system should be developed to provide dynamic solutions for humanitarian logistic operations.

References Akbarpour M, Ali Torabi S, Ghavamifar A (2020) Designing an integrated pharmaceutical relief chain network under demand uncertainty. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev 136(January):101867. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.101867 Almeida WG, Araujo E (2010) Metaheuristic search procedure based on fuzzy graph for p-facility problems.

In: 2010 IEEE World congress on computational intelligence WCCI 2010, pp 1–5 Balcik B, Yanıkoğlu İ (2020) A robust optimization approach for humanitarian needs assessment planning under travel time uncertainty. Eur J Oper Res 282(1):40–57 Brimberg J, Drezner Z (2013) A new heuristic for solving the p-median problem in the plane.

Comput Oper Res 40(1):427–437 Cavdur F, Sebatli-Saglam A, Kose-Kucuk M (2020) A spreadsheet-based decision support tool for temporary-disaster-response facilities allocation. Saf Sci 124(January):104581. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.ssci.2019.104581 Church RL, ReVELLE C (1974) The maximal covering location problem. Pap Reg Sci Assoc 32(1):101–118 Dantrakul S, Likasiri C, Pongvuthithum R (2014) Applied p-median and p-center algorithms for facility location problems.

Expert Syst Appl 41:3596–3604 Daskin M (1982) Application of an expected covering model to emergency medical service system design. Decis Sci 13(3):416–439 Daskin M (1983) A maximum expected covering location model: formulation, properties, and heuristic solution. Transp Sci 17:48–70 Dufour É, Laporte G, Paquette J, Rancourt M–È (2018) Logistics service network design for humanitarian response in East Africa.

Omega 74:1–14 Duran S, Keskinocak P, Ergun Ö, Swann JL (2013) Humanitarian logistics: advanced purchasing and pre-positioning of relief items. Handbook of global logistics. Springer, New York, pp 447–462 Frade I, Ribeiro A (2015) Bike-sharing stations: a maximal covering location approach. Transp Res Part A Policy Pract 82:216–227 Garey MR, Johnson DS (1990) A guide to the theory of NP-completeness.

Comput Intractability 37–79 Global Humanitarian Assistance (2019) GHA Annual Report Global Humanitarian Assistance Report. http://www.globalhumanitarianassistance.org/report/gha-report-2015 246 E. İbrahim Miraç and Ö. Eren Haghani A (1996) Capacitated maximum covering location models: formulations and solution procedures. J Adv Transp 30(3):101–136 Hakimi S (1964) Optimum location of switching centers and the absolute centers and medians of a graph.

Oper Res 12:450–459 Hansen P, Brimberg J, Urošević D, Mladenović N (2009) Solving large p-median clustering problems by primal-dual variable neighborhood search. Data Min Knowl Discov 19(3):351–375 Hashim NM, Shariff SSR, Deni SM (2017) Capacitated maximal covering location allocation problem during flood disaster. Adv Sci Lett 23(11):11545–11548 Ireland & The UN Humanitarian Response Depot (2020).

https://www.irishaid.ie/what-we-do/res ponding-to-emergencies/rapid-response-initiative/ireland-and-the-un-humanitarian-responsedepot/ Jahre M et al (2016) Integrating supply chains for emergencies and ongoing operations in UNHCR. J Oper Manag 45:57–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2016.05.009 Karasakal O, Karasakal E (2004) A maximal covering location model in the presence of partial coverage.

Comput Oper Res 31:1515–1526 Mete S, Cil ZA, Özceylan E (2018) Location and coverage analysis of bike-sharing stations in university campus. Bus Syst Res 9(2):80–95 Mladenović N, Brimberg J, Hansen P, Moreno-Pérez JA (2007) The p-median problem: a survey of metaheuristic approaches. Eur J Oper Res 179(3):927–939 Oksuz MK, Satoglu SI (2020) A two-stage stochastic model for location planning of temporary medical centers for disaster response. Int J Disaster Risk Reduct 44:101426. (August 2019).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2019.101426 Özdamar L, Ertem MA (2015) Models, solutions and enabling technologies in humanitarian logistics. Eur J Oper Res 244(1):55–65 Serra D, Marianov V (1998) The p-median problem in a changing network: the case of Barcelona. Locat Sci 6(1–4):383–394. May–December 1998 Shariff SSR, Moin NH, Omar M (2012) Location allocation modeling for healthcare facility planning in Malaysia.

Comput Ind Eng 62(4):1000–1010 The United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD) (2018). https://unhrd.org/hub United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (2020) World food programme. https://www.wfp. org/unhrd International Logistics Criteria of Medicinal Products for Human Use: How Do They Relate to Cargo Logistics Providers? Shiang-Min Meng Abstract This study explores the logistics criteria of medicinal products with logistics outsourcing.

It examines the subjective decisions of the managers at medicinal product firms with regard to the outsourcing of logistics work to cargo logistics providers. The research targets outsourcing logistics decision makers from firms that manufacture medicinal products for human use in Taiwan. The empirical evidence supports five key logistics criteria factors: documentation, equipment, technology, certification, and training.

The four key logistics outsourcing decision factors examined are quality, freight, service, and delivery. A significant relationship between the logistics criteria of the cargo logistics providers and the outsourcing logistics decisions of the medicinal products firms is also identified.

The study provides an empirical validation of the two-factor construct to develop survey scales for international logistics criteria and client decisions with the establishment of a standard questionnaire, which uses 47 successful questionnaires and follows the Delphi method. Factor analysis was used on 40 criteria between the medicinal products firms and cargo logistics providers.

The Pearson’s coefficients on the correlations applied the two factors of logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions. Keywords International logistics criteria · Client outsourcing decision · Medicinal products for human use · Cargo logistics providers 1 Introduction The global COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak has seriously hampered the delivery of medicinal products by cargo logistics enterprises.

Global logistics companies are essential service providers as they enable medicinal product enterprises to outsource the on-time delivery of their products.

In the past decade, Taiwan’s medicinal products industry has increased its competitive advantages in terms of production through S.-M. Meng (B) Department of International Logistics and Transportation Management, Kainan University, Taoyuan City, Taiwan e-mail: eddymeng@mail.knu.edu.tw © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_16 247 248 S.-M. Meng outsourcing its deliveries to external cargo logistics providers. The outsourcing of a company’s logistics functions represents an effective allocation of their resources and reconfigured its supplier network to build long-term partnerships.

Organizations have traditionally focused their attention on controlling their own costs to increase profitability by concentrating on improving the business processes that the organization controls independently (Ergun et al. 2007). The medicinal products transportation process in different regions has required giving special consideration to the aspects of long-range transportation by trucks, ships, and air cargo.

There has been a need to control the temperature, humidity, and other factors during the transportation process. The outsourcing of key logistics activities has been one of the most important trends in medicinal companies, and the logistics service criteria affect the outsourcing firm’s logistics perception, consequent behavior, and partnership selection (Meng 2014).

The logistics criteria and outsourcing decision factors have led to a growing body of research to define their essential characteristics. Du et al. (2005) pointed out that product customization has been recognized as an effective means to meet individual client’s needs, and customers can be actively involved in the product customization. Logistics outsourcing controls a firm’s differentiation choices on logistics customization and enables executives to pursue improved efficiency.

There are many implications for service value of logistics outsourcing in terms of the customization of services (Remko 2000). Fugate et al. (2006) stated that an effective supply chain flow requires the creation of synergistic relationships between the supply and distribution partners in order to maximize service and provide a profit.

These decisions are largely determined by the political and organizational factors associated with the regional autonomy, geographical factors, climate, travel distances, infrastructure, roads, and electricity supply in which the population is distributed. Logistical outsourcing issues are included in the strategic agenda because they can have a positive influence on company performance (Tracey 2006).

Although logistics studies have become a key component of research work, they have invariably lacked a focus on organizations’ logistics decisions in respect of medicinal products for human use. 2 Logistics on Medicinal Products for Human Use The Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) sets out medicinal products specifications for good distribution practices (GDP), which continue the thrust of the good manufacturing practices (GMP) established in the scheme.

A manufacturer of medicinal products for human use is required to comply with the local legislation. This legislation specifies the application of GMP for medicinal products exclusively intended for export. A manufacturing license, the GMP certificate, is issued, which signifies that laboratory control of the pharmaceutical products has been conducted (Tomić et al. 2010).

The quality of international pharmaceutical products continues to improve, and the quality control regime spans the entire process from production to sales; that is, the drug quality management covers the entire life cycle of the drugs and includes stringent requirements for the procedures. The International Logistics Criteria of Medicinal Products for Human … 249 quality control of international pharmaceutical companies has continued to improve.

The drug quality management process covers the entire life cycle of drugs, and since the GDP came into being, it has extended to drug distribution. Over 130 countries have adopted the GDP specifications. These specifications cover the management required by the wholesale distributors in respect of risk management, inspection, storage, and transport. The distribution processes under GDP are consistent with quality assurance principles (Meng et al. 2019).

Thus, logistics providers are to be able to meet the needs of their medicinal clients by acting as their geographical partner to propagate the spread and range of their clients’ service criteria. Through factor and correlation analysis, this study designs valuable criteria to align with the needs of their outsourcing medicinal companies to enable them to perform some or all of the logistics activities. These will evolve into tailor-made services to meet the diverse needs of their clients.

Chikumba (2009) indicated that medicinal products logistics operators need to get additional spatial information, understand the needs of the health facilities, and take into account environmental factors in order to monitor the flow of medicinal products at each health facility.

Central logistics models are primarily coordinated by arranging for the products to be received first at their central medical stores and then distributed to intermediate stores and ultimately to the final service points. In a decentralized system the intermediate stores are responsible for receiving, storing, and distributing the end products, and they are also responsible for procurement of the production inputs.

The active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) specifications need to comply with the GDP regulations, which comprise procurement, importation, storage, supply, distribution, export activity, processing, packing, reverse logistics, and warehousing, as well as the rules for contract agents, brokers, traders, and others involved in the supply chain that are not the original manufacturers’ suppliers (APIC 2017).

APIs are the parts of any drug that are used in the formulation of the finished product to produce the intended effects of the drug. Based on the drug GMP, the definition of API refers to the components of a drug by reference to its physical and chemical properties, its biological treatment, the technology used in manufacturing to produce the necessary pharmacologically effective active chemical ingredient.

The active chemical ingredients commonly used are drugs manufactured in the production of biotechnology products. With medicinal products for human use, international logistics providers play an important part in aligning GDP and GMP to ensure the stability of the quality during the transport or storage of the products.

They need to monitor the temperature and humidity to ensure they meet the requirements of the national health authority, and to do so, they need to develop customized criteria for pharmaceutical logistics (Meng et al. 2019). For cargo logistics providers involved with medicinal products, the main functions concern the degree of centralization and the number of storage points through which the product will pass before being delivered to the recipient. Roy et al.

(2009) argued that the drug supply available must not only meet with the requirements of the population and the estimated demand for the pharmaceutical items, but it also scientifically meet the quantity and quality of the medicinal products demanded. The overall API logistics links are not allowed to have errors that could compromise the quality of the drugs during transportation.

Accordingly, a strict set 250 S.-M. Meng of comprehensive service standards for drug delivery have been set up to reduce the incidence of risks and accidents in order to maintain a consistent quality of the drugs and to ensure there are no adverse effects on any of the key factors in the delivery process. 3 Delphi Method and Questionnaire Design The data for this study were collected from a survey.

To determine the questionnaire items, it was crucial to ensure their content validity and survey instrumentation accuracy. A standard questionnaire using the Delphi method was established. The questions were based on expert opinions and suggestions from pharmaceutical industry representatives, academics, and those with advanced knowledge in related fields. The first Delphi step involved experts and professors determining the number of experts required for each group.

They decided on one from international ocean freight transportation, one from international air freight transportation, one professor from a university, and one product executive from a pharmaceutical company to provide guidance on the principals of good distribution practices in respect of active substances for medicinal products for human use. The Meng et al.

(2019) studies on medicinal criteria were divided into a total of 40 measures of logistics criteria and client decision-making, as shown in Table 1. The research target for this study is the actual outsourcing logistics decision makers in respect of medicinal products for human use in Taiwan. The results of the pretest of all 40 items were very good, so the survey was distributed to 60 logistics outsourcing decision makers and was carried out during June to September 2019.

A total of 52 successful questionnaires were returned, but five of these were discarded because of incomplete information. Accordingly, there were 47 usable responses for an overall response rate of 78.3%. Statistical analyses and factor analysis were conducted using SPSS. First, factor analysis was used to investigate any separate underlying factors and to reduce redundancy. Next, Pearson correlations were used to assess the bivariate relationships.

The Cronbach’s α values were statistically determined to provide a summary measure of the inter-correlations that existed. In this study, the Cronbach’s α values, which are depicted in Tables 2 and 3, show that the factor dimension attributes with respect to the logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions are all greater than or equal to 0.6. This shows that each dimension achieved reliability.

4 Empirical Results To simplify the analysis structure, this study conducted two factor analyses of the forty items in the logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions lists.

This study adopted the principal components to extract the factors whose Eigenvalue was greater than 1 International Logistics Criteria of Medicinal Products for Human … 251 Table 1 Measurements of international logistics criteria and client decisions Measurements of logistics criteria Measurements of outsourcing decisions 1. Self-check 1. Medicinal products for human use distribution regulations 2. Personnel service 2. Drug delivery processes files need to be saved properly and could date back 3.

Premises and equipment 3. GDP/GMP specifications in respect of compliance document management 4. Complaints 4. Delivery documents are immediately returned 5. Containers and labels 5. Sufficient manpower 6. Organization and management 6. Temperatures in warehouses are periodically calibrated 7. Vehicles and equipment 7. Workplace environment is clean 8. Sending and receiving 8. Drug distribution has excellent specifications (GDP) (blue-chip vendors) 9. Repackaging and relabeling 9.

Provide written procedures for processing jobs under abnormal conditions 10. Product returns 10. Has dangerous goods expertise 11. Contract activities 11. Has expertise in highly potent and toxic drugs 12. Transport 12. Emerging market delivery route planning 13. Recalls 13. Capacity for risk assessment for transport 14. Self-audit 14. Drug storage conditions reflect GMP/GDP knowledge 15. Self-inspection 15. Reverse logistics capacity; able to handle rejection and recalls of pharmaceutical products 16.

Information transfer 16. Workers receive the necessary GMP/GDP training regularly 17. Shipping 17. Acquired Partners in Protection (PIP) certification 18. File management 18. Obtained United States Business Coalition against Terrorism (C-TPAT) certification 19. Quality systems 19. Obtained Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) certification 20. Final provisions 20. Transportation vehicles cleaning procedures and then used the varimax of orthogonal rotation to obtain the rotated coefficients.

Finally, factors four and five were extracted. The accumulated variance explained was 72.13% in respect of the logistics criteria and 68.42% for the outsourcing decision; the analysis results of the individual factors of the logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions are illustrated in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Factor analysis was conducted to classify the identified client’s outsourcing decisions into several critical dimensions.

The results identify equipment as the most important dimension of the logistics criteria, whereas quality is the most important dimension of the outsourcing decisions.

252 S.-M. Meng Table 2 Factor analysis of logistics criteria Factor dimensions of logistics criteria Factor loading Cronbach’s α Eigenvalue Explanation rate (accumulated) DOCUMENTS - File management - Contract activities - Self-inspection - Self-audit 0.59 0.74 0.58 0.66 0.72 3.68 23.82% (23.82%) EQUIPMENT - Premises and equipment - Containers and labels - Vehicles and equipment - Repackaging and relabeling - Shipping - Transport 0.66 0.54 0.69 0.71 0.48 0.51 0.77 0.71 2.91 2.48 16.2% (41.18%) 17.44% (57.46%) TECHNOLOGY - Sending and receiving - Information transfer - Self-check - Final provisions 0.58 0.76 0.59 0.53 0.61 2.98 11.63% (74.41%) CERTIFICATION - Recalls - Product returns 0.78 0.71 0.67 2.43 9.19% (71.21%) TRAINING - Personnel service - Organization and management - Quality systems - Complaints 0.69 0.46 0.44 0.68 0.54 In order to understand the relationships between the factors of the logistics criteria and outsourcing decision indicators, the study used Pearson’s correlation analysis.

The results are shown in Table 4. The empirical results show that there are significant relationships between the factors of the logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions. The detailed analyses and corresponding relationships are stated below. 1. A significant relationship exists between “Documents” and “Quality” as well as “Documents” and “Delivery.” 2.

A significant relationship exists among “Equipment,” “Technology,” and “Certification” and among “Quality,” “Freight,” “Service,” and “Delivery.” 3.

There are significant relationships between “Training” and “Quality” and “Service” and “Delivery.” International Logistics Criteria of Medicinal Products for Human … 253 Table 3 Factor analysis of outsourcing decisions Factor dimensions of outsourcing decisions Factor loading Cronbach’s α Eigenvalue Explanation rate (accumulated) QUALITY - Temperatures in warehouses are periodically calibrated - Drug delivery processes files need to be saved properly and could date back - Medicinal products for human use distribution regulations - Sufficient manpower - Workplace environment is clean 0.69 0.77 0.74 0.64 0.58 0.71 0.71 7.94 37.54% (37.54%) FREIGHT - Transportation vehicles cleaning procedures - Provide written procedures for processing jobs under abnormal conditions - Workers receive the necessary GMP/GDP training regularly - Low cost provider - Acquired Partners in Protection (PIP) Certification 0.59 0.57 0.73 0.58 0.54 0.73 0.87 2.41 1.68 16.77% (54.45%) SERVICE - GDP/GMP specification of compliance document management - Drug storage conditions reflect GMP/GDP knowledge - Expertise in highly potent and toxic drugs - Obtained Authorized Economic Operator (AEO) certification - Has dangerous goods expertise - Obtained United States Business Coalition against Terrorism (C-TPAT) certification 0.69 0.58 0.48 0.57 0.81 0.78 0.58 0.61 1.62 13.41% (75.86%) (continued) 254 S.-M. Meng Table 3 (continued) Factor dimensions of outsourcing decisions Factor loading DELIVERY - Delivery documents are immediately returned - Drug distribution has excellent specifications (GDP) (blue-chip vendors) - Reverse logistics capacity; able to handle rejection and recalls of pharmaceutical products - Emerging market delivery route planning 0.54 0.69 0.43 0.58 Cronbach’s α Eigenvalue Explanation rate (accumulated) 8.36% (72.18%) Table 4 Pearson’s coefficients on logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions Logistics criteria Outsourcing Factors decision Quality Documents Equipment Technology Certification Training 0.24** 0.18** 0.59** 0.35** 0.25* Freight 0.18 0.27** 0.64** 0.31** 0.06 Service 0.04 0.36** 0.57** 0.48** 0.31* Delivery 0.53** 0.56** 0.28** 0.27** 0.48** ** Significance level p < 0.01; Significance level *p < 0.05 4.

“Equipment,”Technology,”and “Certification” in operations are potential logistics factors to connect with the outsourcing decisions. The results showed that the logistics criteria have a significant relationship with the outsourcing decisions.

5 Conclusions This study conceptually defined the domain factors and, using the Delphi method, designed 40 survey items to empirically validate and explore the relationships between the service criteria and outsourcing decisions on the medicinal products examined. The results align with those of Gouveia et al.

(2015), who surveyed European participants with respect to GMP guidelines in which quality, security, and effectiveness at exceptional levels are applicable to the manufacturing of health products. By providing positive logistics criteria to the client, the potential negative service failure associated with the logistics decision is reduced. This suggests that cargo logistics providers should place their emphasis on the documents, equipment, technology, certification, and training factors.

The logistics criteria are the matters that drive the clients’ outsourcing intentions. Understanding the behavioral intention International Logistics Criteria of Medicinal Products for Human … 255 on outsourcing is the main factor to influence clients’ decisions (Meng et al. 2010). This study demonstrated that equipment is the most important criterion and that firms should take it into account when developing their strategy.

The study also presented the strategic management that is necessary regarding the decision factors of quality, freight, service, and delivery. In summary, this study identified the essential factors that need to be comprehensively evaluated to provide an understanding of the logistics criteria and outsourcing decisions. We expect that it can be used as a reference for strategic planning carried out by cargo logistics providers.

The results revealed that the proposed two factors have psychometric properties that are desirable to clients when they make decisions, and that these factors can improve efficiency and core competency. References APIC (2017) Active pharmaceutical ingredients committee: how to do document: GDP for API.

European Chemical Industry Council Chikumba PA (2009) Application of geographic information system (GIS) in drug logistics management information system (LMIS) at district level in Malawi: opportunities and challenges. In: International conference on e-infrastructure and e-services for developing countries, e-infrastructures and e-services on developing countries, pp 105–115 Du X, Jiao J, Tseng MM (2005) Understanding customer satisfaction in product customization.

Int J Adv Manuf Technol 31:396–406 Ergun O, Kuyzu G, Savelsbergh M (2007) Shipper collaboration. Comput Oper Res 34:1551–1560 Fugate B, Sahin F, Mentzer JT (2006) Supply chain management coordination mechanisms. J Bus Logist 27:129–162 Gouveia BG, Rijo P, Gonçalo TS, Reis CP (2015) Good manufacturing practices for medicinal products for human use.

J Pharm Bioallied Sci 7:87–96 Meng SM (2014) Logistics image of outsourcing clients in the wireless telecommunications industry: how is it related to the service value of air cargo logistics provider? Int J Asian Soc Sci 4:940–955 Meng SM, Liang GS, Lin K, Chen SY (2010) Criteria for services of air cargo logistics providers: How do they relate to client satisfaction? J Air Transp Manag 16:284–286 Meng SM, Yang HY, Dai J (2019) International logistics criteria on medicinal products for human use.

Int J Asian Soc Sci 9:148–168 Remko IVH (2000) The role of third-party logistics providers in mass customization. Int J Logist Manag 11:37–46 Roy C, Das JK, Jha HK, Bhattacharya V, Shivdasani JP, Nandan D (2009) Logistics and supply management system of drugs at different levels in Darbhanga District of Bihar. Indian J Public Health 53:147–150 Tomić S, Filipović SA, Ilić MA (2010) Good manufacturing practice: the role of local manufacturers and competent authorities.

J Artic Arch Ind Hyg Toxicol 61:425–436 Tracey M (2006) The role of logistics in strategic management. Int J Integr Supply Manag 2:356–382 Human Factor in Industry 4.0—Perception of Competences of Graduates and Employees Anna Stasiuk-Piekarska Abstract The concept of Industry 4.0 is focused on the production of personalized products in time and cost which are approximate to mass production.

The generated technical and organizational solutions force enterprises to change the role of their employees. He stops to be a contractor and becomes a supervisor of the selfinitiating production process. The chapter presents the research about the perception of competences of employees and graduates by the enterprises in the context of the discussed strategy of Industry 4.0.

This is a part of a wider research carried out using the CATI method on a group of 108 large industrial enterprises located in Poland. They allowed to find out not only how the idea of Industry 4.0 is understood, but also what is necessary to implement it. It gives a chance to formulate guidelines to which areas the attention should be paid to build the competences of future and current staff of industrial enterprises—including logistics—not only in Poland but also in the world.

Keywords Industry 4.0 · Employee’s competences · Industrial enterprise 1 Introduction Enterprises that make a decision to compete on the global market look for ways to reduce costs and acquire commissions to survive on the market. The resulting, inevitable changes are often referred to as industrial revolutions.

Since 2013, we have been watching how the world is preparing and attempting to introduce the Fourth Industrial Revolution, called the Industry 4.0 (Dr. Wieselhuber & Partner GmbH, Fraunhofer-Institut für Produktionstechnik und Automatisierung IPA 2015). The concept was proposed by the German government as a direction in development and support for the competitive efforts of German enterprises.

The new method of production forces the existing and potential employees, meaning staff educated by A. Stasiuk-Piekarska (B) Faculty of Engineering Management, Poznan University of Technology, 60965 Poznan, Poland e-mail: anna.stasiuk-piekarska@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_17 257 258 A. Stasiuk-Piekarska universities, to acquire and use new skills. The author elected to combine considerations on the competences of the existing and future employee, because the need to expand skills and undertake training on communication and the so-called soft competences exists for the both groups of employees.

This creates a special education need, especially among the engineering staff, who must not only prove their technical skills and expertise, but also be willing to introduce changes and drive selfdevelopment. For higher education institutions, on the other hand, this represents an area for scientific research and where educational activities can be expanded and updated.

The Industry 4.0 concept aims to accelerate the emergence of smart factories, which should be based on network cooperation with the use of informational and communication technologies for the purpose of combining machinery, processes, systems, products, clients and suppliers (Bembenek 2017).

An important role here is played by employees, who receive information at any time and from any place (Wyrwicka and Mrugalska 2017), allowing the production of personalized products, the so-called mass customization. This idea defines a broad spectrum of innovations in IT, production technology and material sciences that impact the implementation of the concept of Industry 4.0. Special attention was paid to challenges resulting from Spath et al.

(2013): • handling large amounts of data, • the businesses’ ability to introduce innovations, • flexibility of production processes. These issues may be further expanded with the complexity of enterprise management and ensuring data safety (Spath et al. 2013). As a result, new tasks must be carried out by employees, which, in turn, forces them to acquire different skills and competences.

The use of new technologies gives access to all working parameters in real time and allows analysing massive data bases. This makes it possible to use new steering and control methods with the application of mobile devices and technologies. Consequently, the merging of the real and virtual worlds is observed. An expansion of the traditional concept of the man-machine array (Bendkowski 2017).

2 Employees in Industry 4.0 When arranging the operations of an organisation, one should remember about the individuals tasked with handling it, which most often means the employees themselves. According to Bendkowski, two models of enterprises can be distinguished when analysing work organisation in a smart factory.

The first model is based on structures with changing personnel composition that supports the process of learning on a job position and give the units operational flexibility and a high degree of autonomy. Their structure will be based on self-organising activity networks whose purpose is the completion of a specific task.

Another organisational model will consist in an Human Factor in Industry 4.0—Perception of Competences … 259 enterprise based on polarisation of qualifications, one that supports a far-reaching work division that is a combination of decentralisation and expansion of the scope of duties, while maintaining a strict division of work and standardisation.

The creation of new structures and a different organisation of work may lead to the creation of problems at the intersection of humans, technologies and organisation and their relations to socio-technical systems. This constitutes a determinant for commencing analyses within the area of the impact of technology on shaping social reality.

The result is the necessity to mutually adjust the technology and the requirements of organisational structures and work quality criteria (intellectual development, growth of the employees’ competences and knowledge, among else) (Bendkowski 2017). The ASTOR Reports (2017) on Industry 4.0 Engineers contains research that points to the perception of indispensable competences by employees.

The necessity of training is noted, on the so-called “hard” skills related to technical competences (new automation systems, programming skills, SAP training), financial and organisational competences, cost accounts, work and production organisation, project management and self-management in time.

Among the so-called “soft” competences, the respondents would most often point to human resources management, skills useful for contacting clients and negotiations, acquiring new clients, sharing and transferring competences, competences related to communication, creativity and leadership. At the same time, the report underscores that competences on which cyber security depends will be the basic competences for organisations operating in cybernetic systems (ASTOR 2017).

The employees will cease to be executors, but will become work supervisors, so it seems important to combine the activities on the verge of “cybernetics” with, for example, working with robots or using IT and programming tools (2016). Many authors have noted that employees in companies based on the Industry 4.0 concept must not only have expert competences, but they should also be open to varying tasks and low levels of stability and task repetitiveness.

They must be ready to process and analyse data from multiple sources, with the use of Big Data tools. This creates the need to know how to choose what is important to analyse a given problem, to evaluate the reliability of data and to draw conclusions (Pi˛atek 2018) It is also noted that the competences of the future will have the client’s needs in their centre.

Among the analysed features the following are underscored (Szczerblewska 2017): • client orientation, • flexibility, • critical thinking skills, • openness to digitisation, • readiness and openness to change, • easy adaptation to new conditions and environment, • team work skills, • comprehensiveness and integrity, • ability to work in varying cultural conditions. Hecklau et al.

also mention the ability to transfer knowledge, media skills, understanding IT security or tolerance of ambiguity (Hecklau et al. 2016). 260 A. Stasiuk-Piekarska The omnipresent computerisation will also lead to increased complexity of production processes. It is also assumed that the basic competences will include the ability to solve complex problems and to learn at work.

Smart factories will also require employees who can collaborate with others in the pursuit of a common goal within the value creation process. A view present in literature posits that production workers will have to improve their skills in the area of flexible manufacturing (among else to acquire and improve digital competences in manufacturing, assembly and auxiliary areas related to preparing and planning production, quality management and logistics).

They are also expected to have competences allowing to fulfil the process owner role—sponsoring and designing it, managing changes, introducing improvements. Employees should also strive to take the role of process managers, whose duties included planning and coordinating activities related to carrying out the process, monitoring it and reporting it.

The need to have skills in counteracting any disruptions that may stem from the growing complexity of manufacturing processes is also seen (Bendkowski 2017). Analyzing the above, it is worth noting that Polish universities educate more and more graduates—currently 27.2% of Poles have a university degree (the average in the EU is 28.7%). However, Polish graduates still lack the qualifications needed at work.

Poland achieved a result of only 3.9 according to the Global Competitiveness Index scale (where 7 is the highest assessment of matching students’ competences to their future work). The average for EU countries in this respect is 4.897. This may suggest that it is only at work that young Poles acquire useful competences. What may be noted here is the role of employers in educating staff based on the skills gained from the university.

The increasing degree of automation causes an increase in demand for employees with high technological and digital skills. Higher cognitive skills and socio-emotional skills also seem important. Both the education sector and the companies themselves will have to help employees adapt to this demand. In this context, retraining strategies are important, including lifelong learning and formal employee training. In Poland, adults do not often continue their education. (McKinsey and Company 2019).

3 Evaluation of Competences of Graduates and Employees Research methodology The survey was performed using CATI method, on a sample of 108 respondents. They were performed as a part of the design works of financing the Youth Staff of the Faculty of Engineering Management of the Poznan University of Technology (No. 11/141/DSMK/0586). The survey was completed at the turn of November and December 2019.

Large production enterprises (with over 250 employees) located in Poland were selected for the survey. The questionnaire featured open-ended and close-ended questions. The majority of respondents were employed as specialists, Human Factor in Industry 4.0—Perception of Competences … Fig.

1 Summary list of the survey participants’ responses to the question: “Do the existing employees’ competences allow the implementation of the Industry 4.0 idea?” 261 No 13% 8% 39% 18% Not really I have no opinion Generally yes Yes 22% head managers or directors (more information: Stasiuk-Piekarska and Mrugalska 2020).

The presented results apply to viewing the competences of employees of the examined organisations and the respondents’ evaluation of matching the students’ competences for the purpose of implementing the Industry 4.0 strategy and they constitute a part of the conducted examination.

Competences of employees The first questions aiming to evaluate viewing the possession of competences by individuals from the organisation’s environment (employees or graduates in the labour market) was the request to evaluate the statement “Do the existing employees’ competences allow the implementation of the Industry 4.0 idea?”. To better illustrate the results, the responses were rated according to Likert scale (1–5), where: 1—no, 2— not really, 3—I have no opinion, 4—generally yes, 5—yes.

The results are presented in Fig. 1. The responses to the open-ended question “Do the existing employees’ competences allow the implementation of the Industry 4.0 idea?” show that 19 in 108 respondents have no opinion in the examined area. The responses of 24 survey participants (22% of the surveyed) were considered statements close to “generally yes”.

The respondents had doubts expressed by such statements as “the managerial and engineering staff yes, but not necessarily the older employee”, “depending on the field” or declarations related to training and improving qualifications of their employees. The responses of 42 survey participants were qualified as the confirmation that the employees of the examined organisations have competences allowing the implementation of the Industry 4.0 idea.

The respondents in this group used rather decisive language in their evaluation, with expressions such as “yes” and “definitely yes”, assessing them as good. 14 respondents negatively evaluated the competences of the employees of their respective enterprises in relation to satisfying the requirements of the Industry 4.0 concept. 8 survey participants evaluated this area as rather unfitting to the requirements of the examined idea.

Some of the surveyed noted the lack of financing for 262 A. Stasiuk-Piekarska training, however, some of them assured that their organisation would surely support such activities in the future. The lack of certain competences is also identified, but the specific skills are not named. One of the respondents replied in a manner disregarding the topic, stating that at the time of reply it is generally difficult to retain employees.

The analysis of the obtained information shows the necessity to not only reiterate the request to identify what competences the employees miss, but also the need to analyse the correlation between the job position and the level of assessment of the employed staff.

Shaping the competences of future staff Another examined issue that was supposed to examine the view of having competences by the individuals in the organisation’s environment (employees or graduates in the labour market) was the request to assess the statement “In your opinion, do universities educate staff that supports the development of automation and production customisation?”.

Similarly to the analysis of responses to the previous question, to better illustrate the results, the responses were rated according to Likert scale (1–5), where: 1—no, 2—not really, 3—I have no opinion, 4—generally yes, 5—yes. The results are presented in Fig. 2.

To the question “In your opinion, do universities educate staff that supports the development of automation and production customisation?” 11 respondents (10% of the surveyed) had no opinion with regard to the examined issue, citing the lack of contact with graduates or the relatively small comparison group (“I don’t know, I recently hired 1 person and got good results, but this is not enough”).

10 respondents (10% of the surveyed) believes that universities generally prepare the graduates to support the activity of businesses in terms Industry 4.0. The used wording was related to the respondents’ own experience (“I have graduates several years ago, but I think that [the situation] is improving every year and that the education gets better; the universities are developing and introducing practical classes”) and references were made to collaboration with selected academic units.

(“We are now seeing improvements in mutual relations and attempts to share skills, knowledge and growth”). The positive side is that as many as 51 of the survey participants Fig.

2 Summary list of the survey participants’ responses to the question: “In your opinion, do universities educate staff that supports the development of automation and production customisation?” No 22% Not really 47% 11% 10% 10% I have no opinion Generally yes Human Factor in Industry 4.0—Perception of Competences … 263 assessed the examined issue—whether universities educate staff that supports the development of production automation and customisation—as “yes”, “definitely yes” or “absolutely yes”.

Still, even these opinions came with reservations that there are few such universities or that the graduates lack practical knowledge and on-the-job practice. 24 of the 108 respondents underscored that universities do not or definitely do not educate their graduates adequately for the needs of Industry 4.0.

This group also included respondents who used phrases such as “the university is visibly delayed in terms of the latest technologies” or “the knowledge is there, but there is motivation for work” among the graduates. The surveyed would also use phrases like “not enough and the availability of such personnel is inadequate”.

In relation to the examined issue, 12 respondents believe that there is generally no support for the education supporting Industry from the universities or that there is not enough of it. Moreover, one opinion stated that the graduates have high financial demands. We may consider it a positive that the respondents make references to working with universities and building mutual win-win relations.

On the other hand, we may consider it an alarming trend that graduates are assessed to have low motivation for work, but this may result from the generational gap and the entering of millennials into the labour market. In this regard, universities can support not only their own graduates, but also Gen Xers and Gen Yers, with the purpose to improve human collaboration. We should also not forget about the use of the newest technologies and teaching them to the students.

4 Conclusions This chapter serves as an initial review of literature with regard to competences seen as necessary for implementing and functioning of companies based on the Industry 4.0 concept. Then, the chapter presents the results of examination of the assessment of the degree to which such competences are possessed by employees of large, industrial enterprises operating in Poland and by graduates of higher education institutions.

Significant optimism can be seen among the respondents, as evidenced on the conducted examinations. Nearly 60% of the respondents assessed that the employees of their respective organisations have or generally have competences necessary to implement the concept of Industry 4.0. Nearly 70% of the surveyed evaluated positively or largely positively the competences of graduates in terms of supporting customised and automated production in their enterprises.

We should remain mindful that there is no way to develop business without collaboration with and support from the external environment, also in the areas covered by the educational system. The conducted examination constitutes a foray into the evaluation of the readiness of enterprises to introduce the Industry 4.0 concept.

At the same time, we see the need to deepen the research, if only to address the remarks of the respondents on which competences they consider to be key in terms of developing business according to the analysed strategy. 264 A. Stasiuk-Piekarska Summing these considerations up, a conclusion can be made that the analysed area may constitute a certain group of determinants for the implementation of modern strategies, such as Industry 4.0.

However, in order to be able to obtain highly customised products, it is not only necessary to declare the openness to collaborate with clients and suppliers, but also a more extensive preparedness with regards to production management that coves, among else, digitisation and automation of processes. Acknowledgements Research financed by the Faculty of Engineering Management—Young Personnel Statutory Activities (11/141/DSMK/0586).

Publication financed by the Faculty of Engineering Management—Statutory Activities (11/142//SBAD/1105). References ASTOR (2017) Inżynierowie Przemysłu 4.0 (Nie)gotowi do zmian?. https://www.astor.com.pl/ima ges/Industry_4-0_Przemysl_4-0/ASTOR_Inzynierowie_4.0_whitepaper.pdf. Accessed 29 Feb 2020 Bembenek B (2017) Klastry Przemysłu 4.0 w zrównoważonej gospodarce opartej na wiedzy.

In Prace naukowe Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego we Wrocławiu nr 491. https://www.dbc.wroc.pl/ Content/39466/PDF/Bembenek_Klastry_Przemyslu_4_0_w_Zrownowazonej_Gospodarce_2 017.pdf. Accessed 01 Jan 2020 Bendkowski J (2017) Zmiany w pracy produkcyjnej w perspektywie koncepcji „Przemysł 4.0”. In Zeszyty Naukowe Politechniki Śl˛askiej 2017, seria: Organizacja I Zarz˛adzanie Z. 112 Nr Kol. 1990, pp 21–33. https://yadda.icm.edu.pl/baztech/element/bwmeta1.element.baztech-02e3754a33a3-4262-8691-7b2d31ae63b3.

Dost˛ep: 03 Mar 2020 Dr. Wieselhuber & Partner GmbH, Fraunhofer-Institut für Produktionstechnik und Automatisierung IPA (2015) Geschäftsmodell-Innovation durch Industrie 4.0 Chancen und Risiken für den Maschinen- und Anlagenbau. https://www.wieselhuber.de/migrate/attachments/Geschaeft smodell_Industrie40-Studie_Wieselhuber.pdf. Dost˛ep: 03 Mar 2020 Hecklau F, Galeitzke M, Flachs S, Kohl H (2016) Holistic approach for human resource management in Industry 4.0. Procedia CIRP 54:1–6.

6th CLF-6th CIRP conference on learning factories. https://core.ac.uk/reader/81956090. Accessed 30 Apr 2020 McKinsley and Company, Polska 2030 (2019) Szansa na skok do gospodarczej ekstraklasy. https://www.mckinsey.com/pl/~/media/McKinsey/Locations/Europe%20and%20Middle%20E ast/Polska/Raporty/Polska%202030/Raport%20Polska%202030%20McKinsey%20Forbes. ashx.

Accessed 30 Apr 2020 Pi˛atek Z (2018) Jak rozwijać kompetencje Inżyniera 4.0. https://przemysl-40.pl/index.php/2018/ 04/11/jak-rozwijac-kompetencje-inzyniera-4-0/. Accessed 01 Mar 2020 Spath D (Hrsg) et al (2013) Fraunhofer-Institut Für Arbeitswirtschaft und Organisation IAO, Produktionsarbeit der Zukunft–Industrie 4.0. https://www.iao.fraunhofer.de/images/iao-news/produktio nsarbeit-der-zukunft.pdf.

Accessed 05 Mar 2020 Stasiuk-Piekarska AK, Mrugalska B (2020) Możliwości wdrożenia Przemysłu 4.0 w obszarze technologii w polskich przedsi˛ebiorstwach przemysłowych. In: Knosala R (ed) Inżynieria zarz˛adzania 2, Polskie Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne, w druku Szczerblewska A (2017) Pracownik 4.0, czyli jakich kompetencji wymagaj˛a ci˛agłe zmiany?. https://przemysl-40.pl/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/konferencja_MR_2017_4.pdf.

Accessed 03 Mar 2020 Human Factor in Industry 4.0—Perception of Competences … 265 Wyrwicka MK, Mrugalska B (2017) “Industry 4.0”-towards opportunities and challenges of implementation. In: DEStech transactions on engineering and technology research, 24th international conference on production research (ICPR 2017), pp 382–387. https://www.dpi-proceedings.com/ index.php/dtetr/article/view/17640/17146.

Accessed 15 Dec 2019 Management of the Human Capital of the Persons with Disabilities in Logistics Organizations Krzysztof Czyrka and Józef Fr˛aś Abstract For many years the low level of awareness on the subject of the meaning of the social and economic human capital of the disabled persons in many economies has led to annihilation of the actions in the area of its exploration, development and using it with the result which is negative not only for the disabled persons themselves, but also budget of these countries whose discreditable instance is Poland.

The first goal of the article is to indicate the essence and importance of managing human capital of disabled people. The second goal of the article is to point out recommendations (based on research) for better management of people with disabilities in logistics companies. The study was applied logit models as a tool reinforcing the decisive processes of management of the human capital of the persons with disabilities.

One shall claim that except for the fact of bringing to life the satisfactory array of tools of support of employment of the disabled persons, in the result of the lack of the properly conducted informative policy there takes place a considerable limitation of their role and function.

Keywords Management · Logistics companies · Labor market · Disabled people 1 Introduction In the light of contemporary challenges of the demographic and economic areas of Europe a significant meaning commences to have the notion of the human potential of the people with disabilities. The use of intellectual capital of the disabled is not only benefits for the disabled themselves but also for the labor market and the state budget.

The logistics industry market seems particularly interesting because it is characterized by rapid technological progress and large staffing needs. K. Czyrka The Jacob of Paradies University, Gorzow, Poland e-mail: kczyrka@interia.pl J. Fr˛aś (B) Poznan University of Technology, J. Rychlewskiego 2, 60-965 Poznan, Poland e-mail: jozef.fras@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_18 267 268 K. Czyrka and J. Fr˛aś 2 Methodology Within the framework of the conducted research the quality methods were used, in addition to the quantity ones. Within the quality research the desk research was implemented and what is more, individual extended interviews.

However, in the framework of the quantity methods, the questionnaire was used. Stage 1: Desk research This stage encompassed the theoretical analysis of the scrutinized notions and review of the literature on the topic of the state and situation within the framework of benefiting from the human potential of the disabled persons especially in the context of the logistics companies.

The analysis was conducted with the use of the available publications and enclosed the following issues: theoretical studies on the operationalization of substantial terms connected with management of the human capital of the persons with disabilities on the logistics companies, synthetic studies on the implementation of methods and tools of so called ‘good practice’ in the range of management of the human capital of the persons with disabilities in enterprises, studies on the available statistic data, expertize and reports concerning the state and size of employment of the disabled persons in Poland, studies on the available statistic data, expertize and reports concerning the state and size of employment of the disabled persons in the EU, the research on materials and desk documents directed on the verification of barriers in the range of benefiting from the potential of disability in enterprises of the logistics companies.

Stage 2: Individual in-depth interviews Due to a wide research area—the territory of the whole Poland the individual indepth interviews (IDI) were conducted in the chosen enterprises of the lubuskie and zachodniopomorskie voivodships. The goal of the conversation was to receive as much of pivot information from the respondents on the topic of the issue of management of human capital of the disabled persons as plausible.

The interviews were conducted among the decision-makers of the researched entities as well as the experts connecting the theoretical knowledge with practice. In this way there were diagnosed core resources of information in the scope of the conducted research. Stage 3: The questionnaire Realization of the accepted research method in the third stage required the construction of the research tool—a questionnaire.

In order to check the correctness of the provided method of the research and the tools used there was conducted a pilot research which was supposed to verify the correctness of the construction of the research tool—the questionnaire and the way of collecting the data and the implementation of the possible corrections. The pilot research encompassed 16 randomly chosen firms from the list of the companies subjected to the core survey.

Having checked the results of the pilot research and taking into account the remarks of the explored enterprises concerning the survey, the author undertook the core research. Management of the Human Capital of the Persons with Disabilities … 269 The correlated questions in the questionnaire were subjected to the issues stemming from the realization of an average research goal and the verification of the research thesis.

The questionnaire concerned the quantity and quality traits, encompassed close-ended questions in which a wide range of statements were cited and the respondent was asked to mark their answer according to a scale consisting of a few points and which was also a bipolar one, ranging from a full approval to a total disapproval.

3 Results/Methods Testing/Model Validation The effectiveness of benefiting from the human potential of the persons with disabilities is explored and scrutinized most often in reference to the macro economic factors.

On the basis of the elaborate study touching upon literature of the subject and synthetic exploration presented in the first and the second chapter of the very dissertation one may state that truly significant macroeconomic factors which constitute barriers and problems in using the human capital of the disabled persons are: unstable and complex legal regulations in the range of employment of the disabled persons, unstable and complex conditions of financial support, low efficiency and purposefulness of expenditures of the supporting funds in the range of promoting the employment of the disabled persons, generally low professional activity of the disabled persons as a group and individuals on the logistics companies.

It is confirmed by the results of the research conducted by the author of the following thesis within the framework of the project ‘Management of the human potential of the disabled persons in the organizations on the example of the Protected Labor Plant of the Western Poland’ in 2011 (https://docplayer.pl/3206536-Co-to-jest-sodir-system-obs lugi-dofinansowan-i-refundacji.html 2019).

However, apart from the undoubtful core role of the barriers mentioned above and being the obstacles of management of the human potential of the disabled persons, one rarely indicates here internal determinants (lying in conditions of a company) of a low effectiveness of benefiting from the human potential of the people with disabilities.

That is why the problem of benefiting from the human capital of the disabled persons undoubtedly does not lay solely in the sphere of the macro economic factors but also in the great extent depends on the readiness of enterprises of the logistic companies to employ the disabled persons and is apprehensive about: openness to employ the persons with disabilities (directing oneself with stereotypes and prejudices), possessing the decent knowledge allowing to benefit from the available tools of the financial support, readiness to conduct technological and organizational changes if the need occurs, possessing the essential knowledge and skills to implement methods and tools of managing the human capital, when taking into account the persons with disabilities.

Bearing in mind the fact that it is well worth either in this perspective to have a look at the received results of the research. The basic factor which conditions the readiness to employ the persons with disabilities is the inclusion in the strategy of gaining and management of the human capital of the firm the policy of employment of the 270 K. Czyrka and J. Fr˛aś disabled persons.

It is exclusively about forecasting the possibilities of employment of the persons with disabilities, but practically taking into account this probability in the processes of management of the human resources, so in: • procedures of recruitment, selection and nominating, • policy of professional development and trainings, • policy of appraisal, • policy of motivation, • interpersonal relations of organization.

Openness in the prism of problematics of employment of the persons with disabilities understood as breaking the stereotypes, prejudices and constraints connected with them at the potential employers is the primary and fundamental means, however cannot be treated as a sole category and what is even more, the ultimate one. Moreover, one needs to mark that openness in itself in the sphere of practical management does not imply anything.

Without taking into account practical spheres as the results impose, there occur much trouble in the area of management of the disabled workers and in the extreme cases—the conflict with the law and its all consequences. That is why it is vital to make the strategy enclose the national policy and law making system in the area of employment of the disabled people and the programs of support where they exist.

What needs to be emphasized is the fact that the effort and responsibility for securing these areas are on the hands of employers themselves. In this scope one shall have a look at the gained research result. The analysis showed that the lack of encompassing the policy of employment of the disabled persons in the strategy of gaining and managing the human capital took place in 65% of the instances of the studied companies.

The question if the strategy of gaining and managing the human potential is ingrained into the policy of employment of the disabled people—42% of the respondents answered ‘rather no’ and 23% ‘no’. At the same time the gained results prove that employers of the logistic companies in the great majority are characterized by the lack of readiness to employ the disabled people. In the prism of the results received there, it is indispensable to find out and indicate reasons of such course of action. 1.

The issue of knowledge on the theme of tools of support in the array of employment of the persons with disabilities and also conditions which one is supposed to meet to get them One is required to underscore the dependence which exists between the degree of readiness to employ the disabled persons and the level of the knowledge on the theme of tools of support in the range of employment of the persons with disabilities.

It means that (in a reversed form) if an enterprise possesses such kind of the knowledge, then the readiness to employ the persons with disabilities is higher. Moreover the power of dependability between the variables indicated above is prominent, which is shown by the calculated coefficient of convergence of Czuprow’s to 0.234.

For convergence a remarkable power and direction of the relation between the knowledge on tools of support in the area of employment of the persons with disabilities and the extent of readiness to employ the persons with disabilities is unequivocally showed Management of the Human Capital of the Persons with Disabilities … 271 by the attained result of the correlation coefficient of Spearman’s ranks which was 0.2672. 2.

The problem of procedures in the range of receiving funds of support of employment for the persons with disabilities As it is visible in the results of exploration, the major group of the firms employing the disabled people and possessing the entitlement to benefit from SoiD (https://docplayer.pl/3206536-Co-to-jest-sodir-system-obslugi-dofina nsowan-i-refundacji.html 2019) did not take advantage of endowments to salaries or other subsidies in the result of the lack of the knowledge on the topic of procedures of their receiving.

When the entrepreneurs who employed the persons with disabilities in 33% (summed up answer ‘no’ and ‘rather no’) did not have this data, the ones who did not employ responded so in 89% (60% answered ‘no’ and 29% ‘rather no’ so as to being knowledgeable). 3. The problem of the knowledge on the subject of legal privileges of the disabled persons In the light of the possibility of benefiting from the range of the tools of support, employers are required to meet the defined duties.

Among the other there are foremost the duty to abide legal privileges of the disabled workers which is connected with possessing the knowledge on them. Here the result of the study proved that the employers who do not provide jobs to the disabled persons in the great majority were not accustomed with the array of privileges for a disabled person as a worker.

For the question: Does your company possess the knowledge concerning the legal privileges of the disabled persons as workers?—the employers in 37% indicated: ‘rather no’ and in 27% ‘no’. A reverse tendency is present among the employers who do employ the persons with disabilities, who in 95% (the answer ‘yes’ got 80% and ‘rather yes’ 15%), but on the other hand what is troublesome is that 5% of the firms did not or rather not have such knowledge.

One needs to mark that is the indispensable realm and one cannot diminish its prominence in relation to the benefits for employers, since first of all, meeting these requirements entitles to receive subsidies and moreover in extreme cases in the result of their lack of fulfillment may expose the company to serious sanctions.

The study revealed that apart from the noneffective promotion and informative policy from the side of state institutions, the acquaintance of privileges of the disabled persons lays in the interest of the companies which have decided to implement into the strategy of management of the human capital employing the persons with disabilities. 4.

The issue of promotion of employment of the disabled persons by public institutions The efficiency of promotion of employment of the disabled persons by public institutions (which should take place among the others by indicating the economic benefits for the companies), was either by the employers providing jobs to the disabled persons or the ones not doing so assessed very strictly.

In the eyes of 80% of the entrepreneurs not providing jobs to the disabled persons, the promotion of employment of these 272 K. Czyrka and J. Fr˛aś people was seen as not sufficient and according to 17% rather not sufficient. Even more strictly the entrepreneurs assessed the question of promotion of the human potential of the persons with divisibilities in the time of realization of the research.

According to 93% of the investigated, the promotion of employment of the disabled people was regarded as insufficient (85% of the researched responded that it is insufficient and 17% that it is rather insufficient). In the prism of the appraisal received in this way, one awaits a brisk improvement in the range of the informative and promotional policy. 5.

Problems of cooperation with non-government organizations in the range of employment of the people with disabilities Taking into account the problems depicted above, a great solution may turn out to be the cooperation of the enterprises of the logistics companies with non-government organizations which often possess the essential and legal knowledge and also experience plus they can render skilled aid.

Today, such organizations (due to benefiting from the EU funds) dispose very often of the array of not only essential support but also so as to financing apprenticeships, courses, trainings etc. However, the research has shown that that kind of help can be found among the enterprises employing the disabled persons (57%), but in reference to the ones which do not perform so, such a cooperation takes place in a minor scope (only 3% declared such cooperation).

Moreover, the strength of dependence between the indicated variables is moderate, which is proved by the coefficient of convergence by Czuprow which amounted to 0.335.

The moderate dependence of the power and its direction of the relation between the fact whether the company cooperates with some kind of organization of non-government origins which promotes the employment of the DP and the extent of readiness to provide jobs to them is demonstrated by the attained result of the correlation coefficient of Spearman’s ranks which was 0.40453. 6.

The issue of adjusting the architecture and the workplaces to the needs of a person with disability To many issues in the area of benefiting from the human potential in the quantity and quality aspect in the firms of the logistic companies one needs to enclose the physical barriers connected with architecture of buildings and workplaces. The problematic is truly vital in the prism of the persons which are affected by disabilities in the motor organs, sight and hearing ones.

In Poland there is approximately 3 million of the disabled persons with the impairment of the motor system, over 1300 thousand with the sight impairment and close to 700 thousand with the impairment of hearing (Czyrka 2013).

In the structural picture for the production age, which is vital from the point of view of the labor market, the most common ailment in Poland is the one touching the motor organs 48.2% and then: cardiovascular system 32.9%, neurological damage 32.7%, sight impairment 20%, psychical ailments 14.6%, hearing impairment 6.2% and mental handicap 7.2% (GUS 2018).

These numbers indicate a great role and at the same time a great responsibility or the people who decide on the shape of the architecture of the physical milieu and not only in companies but in all possible spheres of life of a person.

Management of the Human Capital of the Persons with Disabilities … 273 4 Conclusions The conducted extrapolation proves that the extent of readiness of enterprises to employ the DPs is a factor which is decisive for benefiting from the usage of the human capital of the people with disabilities on logistics companies while the determinants of its amount are the factors of the internal and external origins.

As the research has shown, the primary and fundamental means in the aspect of using the human potential of the persons with disabilities of the logistics companies—is supporting and creating the approach of openness, understood as the process of breaking stereotypes, prejudices and apprehension connected with that, either speaking of the employers or the disabled themselves.

One is required also to ponder on the implementation of a social campaign from the means of PFRON’s on the central level, the so called media of the national range, with the usage of not only the form of standard commercials but also by the method of building up openness to employ the persons with disabilities via the so called’ locating of the message’ in serials, films and frameworks of a considerable audience.

All the more so because of the mission of the State Fund for Rehabilitation of Disabled People (PFRON’s) is to create conditions facilitating full participation in professional and social life for Persons with Disabilities. A good complementary solution seems to be the inclusion in this area the actions on the local area via booking and sharing funds for organizing conferences, courses and other initiatives which promote openness for employment of the disabled persons.

The study has proved that in reference to the readiness of enterprises to employ the disabled persons (a decisive factor) the issue of breaking stereotypes apart from its significance cannot be treated as the only, ultimate one since in the sphere of practical management it does not contribute anything.

That is why the readiness of enterprises to profit from the human capital of the disabled persons shall be regarded not only in the categories of the attitude of openness for employment of the DPs but also in the practical consideration of the reaffirmed possibility: • in the national policy and law making in the range of employment of the disabled persons especially in the programs of aid where they exist, • in processes of management of human resources (recruitment and selection, the policy of professional development and trainings, the policy of appraisal, the policy of motivation, relations of interpersonal organizations).

In this context the process of the research reveled that: Among the employers of the Among the employers of the logistics companies (even employing the disabled persons) there occurs a great shortage of the knowledge on the subject of the available tools of support for providing posts to the persons with disabilities as well a conditions of their receiving.

(even employing the disabled persons) there occurs a great shortage of the knowledge on the subject of the available tools of support for providing posts to the persons with disabilities as well a conditions of their receiving.

One shall claim that except for the fact of bringing to life the satisfactory array of tools of support of employment of the disabled persons, in the 274 K. Czyrka and J. Fr˛aś result of the lack of the properly conducted informative policy there takes place a considerable limitation of their role and function. First of all the encouraging function (the category of defined financial support for an employer).

What needs to be emphasized is the matter that the statistically conducted proof process revealed that this factor has a huge meaning for the extent of readiness of enterprises to provide jobs to the DPs.

Among the employers of the Among the employers of the logistics companies (even employing the disabled persons) there occurs a great shortage of the knowledge on the subject of the available tools of support for providing posts to the persons with disabilities as well a conditions of their receiving.

(even employing the disabled persons) there dominates the lack of acquaintance of the procedures in the range of acquiring aid funds for employment of the disabled people which constituted a barrier which hindered benefiting from these means. The first crucial cause of that fact created impediments in receiving the comprehensive and current knowledge in this scope.

The second, fears of the complex process of procedures in the context of: the need to devote additional time and generating costs connected with that and also apprehension of extra audits in connection with profiting from the forms of aid. One shall mention that the core of this factor in the context of readiness of companies in order to provide posts to the DPs confirmed in the entire scope the statistic calculations.

Bearing in mind the dimension of the influence of both of the factors above (the knowledge on the subject of the available tools of support and also conditions in order to receive them and the knowledge on the acquaintance of procedures in the area of aid means) on the readiness of enterprises of the logistics companies to profit from the human potential of the persons with disabilities and concurrently the fact of a breakthrough moment in the domain of law making regulating the question of using the aid scheme which is balancing the amount of endowments, starting from the 2nd quarter of 2014, to salaries on the open and the protected labor market, one shall recommend as a priority to run the campaign of promotion and information roots within the scope of employment of the disabled persons in media of the national range, underscoring the benefits for employers stemming from providing jobs to the people with disabilities which should simultaneously constitute a redirection of the formerly activated on-line central platform of employment of the disabled persons enclosing (providing): • the collection of the indispensable date in the prism of employment of workers who are disabled, updated on a current basis and written in a simple language; • the opportunity to conduct consulting which will be free of charge in the range of benefiting from the tools of support for employment of the disabled persons and procedures connected with that, including clearances and reporting in the traditional, on-line and call-in.

Management of the Human Capital of the Persons with Disabilities … 275 References https://docplayer.pl/3206536-Co-to-jest-sodir-system-obslugi-dofinansowan-i-refundacji.html.

Accessed 31 Oct 2019 According to the data of the Bureau of the Plenipotentiary of the Government towards the Affairs of the Disabled Persons in the study of the the Health of the People, GUS 2018 Commission Communication: “Europe 2020” (2010) A strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, European Commission, Brussels 3.3.2010, KOM, 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/eu2020/pdf/ 1_PL_ACT_part1_v1.pdf.

Accessed 20 June 2019 Co-financing for the remuneration of disabled employees (2013) Proposed changes in 2014, Warsaw 2013. https://www.senat.gov.pl/gfx/senat/userfiles/_public/k8/komisje/2013/kbfp/opi nie/127_20.pdf. Accessed 14 May 2018 Czyrka K (2013) Zarz˛adzanie potencjałem ludzkim osób niepełnosprawnych w organizacjach, dysertacje doktorskie, Wyd.

PWSZ w Gorzowie Wielkopolskim, Gorzów Wlkp, pp 1–307 European Health Institute Study (EHIS), GUS 2009 GUS BAEL–average annual data for 2014 for disabled people of economic working age 18–59/64. https://www.niepelnosprawni.gov.pl/index.php?c=page&id=80&print. Accessed 20 2019 Quarterly information on the labor market (2013) Monitoring of the labor market, Labor Department of GUS, Warsaw, 29 May 2013 Steczkowski J (1995) Metoda reprezentacyjna w badaniach zjawisk ekonomiczno-społecznych.

Wydawnictwo naukowe PWN, Warszawa-Kraków, p 45 Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During Handling of Loads Adam Górny Abstract Manual handling is a major category of occupational operations that entail a range of specific risks and other onerous consequences. These make it necessary to assess the implications of strains and consider the available improvement options.

The scope and nature of such measures should ensure compliance with existing laws and be consistent with relevant assessment findings. The chapter describes an approach to such an assessment relying on the use of the Manual Handling Assessment Charts (MAC). The MAC method allows a good match with the specific nature of the risks and strains that arise in the course of manual load handling.

The case of the job of the warehouse attendant has been used to assess strenuousness, identify areas in which strains exceed levels tolerable by worker bodies and suggest appropriate improvements. The use of a sequence of actions that is recommended in MAC guidelines has helped gather and compile the information necessary to identify the necessary modifications in the work environment and workflows.

Keywords Manual handling · Risk assessment · The MAC method · Improvement of work environment 1 Introduction A substantial portion of the work performed in warehouses involves manual load handling. Such work often entails enormous risks resulting predominantly from muscoskeletal overexertion (Batish and Singh 2008; Bhattacharya 2014; Roman-Liu 2014; Bevan 2015).

Some of the most common causes of strains include incorrect postures that are usually restrained during work and the handling of loads whose weight exceeds workers’ capabilities. The result are excessive strains (Bhattacharya 2014; Bevan 2015) as well as excessively repetitive tasks (Enez and Nalbantoğlu 2019).

A. Górny (B) Faculty of Engineering Management, Poznan University of Technology, Institute of Safety and Quality Engineering, Prof. Rychlewski St. No 2 (room 357), 60-965 Poznan, Poland e-mail: adam.gorny@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_19 277 278 A. Górny Table 1 Characteristics of working conditions in transport activities in Poland in 2018 (Working conditions in 2018 2019) Business activity section Persons exposed to risk factors Total covered by survey Employees with high risk Employed in conditions of excessive physical exertion Total Share among those covered Total Per 1,000 employees Transportation and storage 577,669 29,342 5.1 11,744 20,3 Warehousing and support activities for transportation 137,119 13,839 10.1 7,736 53.5 The significance of the problem is indicated by the number of employees working in the conditions of hazards associated with carrying out transport.

A summary of these data is presented in Table 1. Particular attention should be note to the section: Warehousing and support activities for transportation. This section has a 10.1% share of work performed during which significant (usually unacceptable) risk was diagnosed and 53.5% share of employees with excessive physical strain. When analyzing the data provided, it should be noted that this only covers the estimated part of employees covered by the diagnosis.

An additional problem is the large number of illness and accident events caused by onerousness and hazards, and consequently the benefits paid out because of it. In Poland in 2018 was over 260,000 cases, which was an infamous third position in the business activity section after manufacturing and mining. The causes of the events are equally important.

According to the reasons indicated by the Statistics Poland, the most common causes are (Working conditions in 2018 2019): • The moved object is too heavy (too big weight), too large, bulky or difficult to maintain according with the verdict of the person employees managing, • The object is unstable or its contents may move, • The object is positioned so that it requires keeping or operating at a distance from the employee’s torso or tends to bend or wrap around the employee’s torso, • The shape or structure of the object may cause injury to the employee, especially in the event of a collision, • Moving the object can be done only by turning the torso, • Performing the work requires tilting the employee’s torso by more than 45° or performing unstable operations, • The work place or its surroundings make impossible to move the object at a height ensuring safety or with the correct body position of the employees, • The surface on which employees move is uneven, creates a danger when moving or is slippery in contact with the footing of employee footwear, Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During … 279 • The floor and work surface have different levels, which forces you to move objects at different heights, • The floor or foot surface is unstable, • The object limits the employee’s field of view, • Environmental conditions, in particular temperature, humidity and ventilation are not adapted to the nature of the work performed.

The above makes it necessary to assess risks, determine whether specific work tasks should be allowed and identify improvements necessary to eliminate risks or mitigate their effects. The need for risk elimination and mitigation is set forth in applicable laws. It is also recognized by employers who seek to minimize the strains that result from failures to ensure safe working conditions.

The primary aim of the assessment is to contribute to the identification of solutions that will reduce the impact of existing risks on workers. The proposed technical and organizational solutions reflect the nature of non-conformities and the severity of their impacts on workers.

The occurrence of strains during manual handling and their effects alone does not oblige employers to employ countermeasures to mitigate their adverse consequences, which include accidents and diseases arising during the performance of work operations. The responsibility to take the measures follows from general safety criteria as well as manual handling requirements (Sado et al. 2019).

Before proper improvement measures can be selected, an analysis of the nature of risks is in order that will allow one to identify and apply the most appropriate technical and organizational solutions (Górny 2017). Both general manual handling guidelines and specific requirements regarding the modalities in which handling operations should be performed are laid down in the law.

The fundamental instrument of the European law in this area, the so called framework directive that underpins more detailed recommendations, is Council Directive 89/391/EEC. More detailed modalities and methods of manual handling are provided for in Directive 90/269/EEC, which supports the framework directive.

Together, the two directives define the responsibilities of employers and employees which, if adhered to, will ensure safety, lower the probability of the occurrence of risks and eliminate the risks that may potentially cause accidents (Bhattacharya 2014; Bevan 2015). What the directives do not describe are the specific ways to assess risks.

It is therefore up to the employer to select the most appropriate assessment method that is best suited to the nature of the irregularities occurring at a particular workplace. 2 Assessment of Risks Associated with Manual Handling General Guidelines for the Assessment of Existing Risks The primary responsibility of employers is to keep their workers safe and appropriately deploy practicable safety solutions (Caroly et al. 2010).

Such improvements need to reflect the circumstances at hand and be taken with their actual impact 280 A. Górny on safety in mind. The choice of tools and measures applied to improve working conditions should be based on an assessment of risks and options for modifying workstations and work tasks that are available in view of the current state of the art in technology.

To that end, due account should be taken of: • The nature of the strains in question, including the adequacy of the loads handled vis-à-vis worker capabilities, the possibility of holding loads in a firm and secure manner, the ways in which loads are gripped and handled and workers’ proneness to injury during load handling, • The acceptable level of physical exertion during task performance, • Work environment specifications such as the room available to workers, surface types, the stability of foot support and physical parameters, • The conditions in which work is performed such as the frequency and durations of spinal strains, the forms of rest, the available recovery periods, the pace of work, the extent of control over the pace of work given to workers, and the demand to handle excessive loads and/or carry them over excessive distances.

An essential aspect of risk assessment is the physical fitness of workers relative to the tasks they are expected to perform, the use of proper protective clothing and footwear and the completion of training in the performance of the required operations. A workstation-specific risk assessment should be designed to offer answers to questions concerning the capability to complete relevant tasks (Bhattacharya 2014; Bevan 2015; Goode et al. 2019) such as: • What risks occur at the workstation?

• Who is exposed to such risks? • What types of injuries may result from the risks? • What is the probability of the occurrence of circumstances that lead to risks in the work environment? • What parts of the work environment need to be modified to reduce risks? • What protections can be put in place to prevent the occurrence of circumstances that result in risks? • What are the chances of injuries (accidents) being triggered by the circumstances that result in risks?

• How to protect people (workers) in circumstances that result in risks and in circumstances in which exposures to risks are unavoidable? To be able to undertake measures aimed at eliminating irregularities, employers must design their workplaces to standards that will enable them to identify conditions that promote comfortable postures that are unlikely to result in excessive loads or strains (Pinder and Frost 2011; Salas et al. 2016).

How to Apply the MAC The Manual Handling Assessment Charts (MAC) is a method used to examine and assess the risks that occur during manual handling. The tool is designed for identifying the factors that generate the biggest risks during the lifting, carrying and team handling of loads. The method is not used to assess pushing and pulling operations.

Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During … 281 It is not a replacement for a full occupational risk assessment of jobs (Monnington et al. 2003; Pinder 2003; Pinder and Frost 2011). The MAC requires users to go through a sequence of stages that help gather the information necessary for the assessment and identify the required changes.

Such assessment stages are (the MAC tool): • STAGE 1: Assessment of working conditions at workplace, • STAGE 2: Consultations with workers and their representatives, • STAGE 3: Ascertaining whether the work method and workflows in place are common for a given job, • STAGE 4: Selection of an appropriate type of assessment of manual handling operations (lifting, carrying, team handling), • STAGE 5: Completion of the score sheet, • STAGE 6: Analysis of results, • STAGE 7: Proposal of improvements in working conditions and of changes in the ways loads are handled.

The risk assessment involves assigning indicators and risk levels to assessment criteria, as per Table 2. Such risk levels will additionally provide an indication of how urgently improvements are needed. The assignment of a particular operation to a specific color band helps identify the operations that belong to a specific task and that require particular attention. Where tasks involve multiple operations, total task scores help prioritize actions.

An assessment of lifting and carrying operations follows the guidelines provided in Tables 3 and 4 as relevant for each operation. Such an assessment relies on the identified risk levels with their assigned numerical scores of risk impact. Once obtained, assessment scores are entered into the collective MAC score sheet. It is recommended that the tasks associated with particularly high risk levels be Table 2. Risk levels (own work based on Monnington et al.

2003; Pinder and Frost 2011; The MAC tool 2020) 282 A. Górny Table 3. Criteria applicable to the assessment of lifting operations (own work based on Monnington et al. 2003; Pinder and Frost 2011; The MAC tool 2020) Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During … 283 Table 4. Criteria applicable to the assessment of carrying operations (own work based on Monnington et al. 2003; Pinder and Frost 2011; The MAC tool 2020) – – 284 A. Górny indicated.

For added score sheet clarity, the letters used should reflect the color associated with identified risk levels. 3 An Example of Using the MAC Method in Workplace Risk Assessment Risk Factor Identification The manual handling strains were assessed for the case of a warehouse attendant in a wholesale electrical supplies establishment. The company’s core business is the wholesale and retail sale of cables, cords and other fitting items.

The warehouse attendant works on a three-person team in a two-shift system. His job description includes typical operations involved in the receiving of goods and their preparation for shipping as well as their placement on shelves and in a storage yard. In performing his work, the warehouse attendant uses technical tools that are adequate for its nature. Some of the tasks performed by the warehouse attendant require manual load handling.

The work is done in keeping with the available job manuals and using knowledge learned in his training. Observations have shown that when handling materials, the worker frequently assumes wrong body postures that place excessive strains on his muscoskeletal system. During risk factor identification, NIOSH checklists were used to identify ergonomic risk factors in jobs characterized by a high likelihood of developing muscoskeletal disorders and locomotor diseases (Harward 2004; Górny 2020).

Two checklists were used that are helpful in assessing strains in warehouse attendants: • List 5A: General checklist of ergonomic risk factors, • List 5F: Checklist for manual load handling. An assessment based on affirmative answers relied on direct observations at workstation and interviews with the warehouse attendant. Table 5 provides sample questions and answers that help identify the risk factors associated with manual handling operations.

Risk Assessment For the assessment to be appropriate, it is essential to demonstrate in advance that no counter indications exist to the performance of specific work. The individual assessed is a 32-year-old man who has been employed as a warehouse attendant for the last 4 years. The worker is in good health and very fit. His work involves carrying and lifting loads. The nature of the operations he conducts is described and the relevant assessment scores are provided in Table 6.

The score sheet additionally offers reasons why specific scores were assigned to individual risk levels. The worker is not involved in any team handling. Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During … 285 Table 5 Risks arising during manual handling Question asked to determine the presence of risks or strains Does the risk/strain exist? List 5A, Part A.1: Manual load handling A.1.1 Does the worker lift tools, parts and/or other loads?

 A.1.2 Does the worker lower tools, parts and/or other loads?  A.1.4 Does the worker bend torso when handling tools, parts and/or  other loads? List 5A, Part A.2: Energy expended A.2.1 Do the tools and parts weigh more than 5 kg?  A.2.4 Is the lifting or lowering of loads the worker’s primary occupational task?  A.2.5 Is walking and/or carrying of loads by the worker a key work factor?  A.2.7 Is pushing and/or pulling of loads by the worker a key work factor?

 List 5F F.2 Are materials carried over minimal distances? a F.3 Is the distance between worker body and the item handled minimal? a F.4.3 Are the routes and surfaces along and on which workers move a dry and clean? F.6 Are the objects handled fitted with handles? a F.9 Is there sufficient room for maneuvering? a F.11 Are work surfaces adjustable to ensure their height is a best fits a the type of manual work being performed?

F.12.1 Can the worker avoid handling loads below the height of hand knuckles and above shoulder height? a F.12.4 Can the worker avoid torso twisting when handling loads? a F.13 Is there help available to workers lifting heavy loads and/or assuming unnatural postures? a F.14.1 Are risks associated with highly repetitive tasks eliminated by e.g. rotating workers? a F.15 Is the need to use force in pulling or pushing minimized or eliminated?

a F.17 Is there an injury prevention program in place that helps workers use auxiliary equipment? a a Negative answers point to the presence of the risk factor An observation of the performance of the work performed by the warehouse attendant revealed a number of irregularities reflected in the final assessment score. These pertain in particular to factors designated with the letter R (red). Verification (i.e.

further observation, in-depth examination) is also required for operations marked with the letter A (amber). The numerical score should be seen as a general assessment 286 A. Górny Table 6. MAC score sheet for the job of warehouse attendant – – – Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During … 287 that cannot be associated with any specific tasks. In the case in question, one can assume that particular risks to worker health arise during carrying operations.

The assessment results advised the determination of the scope of technical and organizational solutions to be recommended to adequately address the existing problems and their causes. Improvement Measures Workstation observations and an occupational risk assessment helped identify improvements affecting work methods. The suggested technical and organizational solutions reflect the nature of risks and strains and the severity of their impacts on workers.

Workstations were designed to best fit the postures assumed by workers during the work process and the forces exerted during manual handling. It is also crucial to account for static loads resulting from the need to maintain a restrained body posture, the highly repetitive nature of the work and the substantial amounts of energy expended in performing operations.

The recommended technical solutions designed to mitigate risks in the performance of tasks are as follows: • Improvements in the manner in which cable coils are carried from the winding site to storage racks—the improvements rely on the use of containers with properly designed handles to carry cable coils in both hands in front of the torso; one way to do away with carrying the coils altogether is to move them on manual pallet trucks or in wheeled containers, • The use of stands for storing cable spool axles horizontally and eliminating the need to carry them from the storage site to the cable winder, • Improvements in the way boxes are lifted from manual pallet trucks and placed on storage shelves at shoulder height.

The related risks can be mitigated by using work platforms, which are particularly helpful for shorter workers who are otherwise forced to collect items from shelves located above their shoulder height and place items on them, • Improvement in the way boxes are lifted from manual pallet trucks and placed on warehouse shelves at the height of more than 6 cm above warehouse floor; strap handles on carboard boxes will help eliminate the existing risks associated with the performance of such work.

The organizational solutions are designed to modify the work environment to best fit worker needs and raise worker awareness of the existing risks.

The suggested organizational measures involve: • Changing the location of the work bench used for winding cable coils, thus shortening the distance over which workers carry the load, • Placing a fence around cable coil storage to separate it from warehouse travel routes, • Changing the storage location used for fixing axles to provide workers with freedom of movement during their handling, 288 A. Górny • Designating a storage zone as close to receiving as possible to reduce worker exposure to untoward external environment factors, • Setting aside a location for the storage of heavy and rarely used items on the lowest rack shelves while keeping the most frequently used items between knee and elbow height, • Making work breaks longer or establishing an additional break, • Providing the workers with footwear with non-slip soles, steel toes and cushioned heels, • Ensuring that the weight of the loads handled reflects worker capabilities.

Regardless of the above, it is essential to make safety improvements. These include regular checks of warehouse floors for cleanliness, as well as worker training and physical examinations of workers with a view to preventing muscoskeletal disorders. Quite commonly, even tasks viewed as light may result in excessive strains on the muscular system. Such strains typically result from incorrect working technique (Pandya and Desai 2019; Chiasson et al. 2015).

Hence, even minor modifications of the method and course of work and in the work environment itself may be welladvised (Sadłowska-Wrzesińska et al. 2016). Additional benefits can be derived from strict adherence to technical standards. Technical documents may be referred to for information on the latest technical advances and best organizational practices in workplace design to ensure proper protection of worker health and safety.

The working conditions in place must facilitate injury-free performance. It is crucial to enshrine the principles of work performance in in-house rules and ensure such principles are well respected. 4 Conclusions As manual handling is associated with the risk of injury, employers are often exposed to significant financial losses.

The nature and severity of such risks have compelled the legislator to adopt laws that offer guidelines on ways to assess whether specific work can be performed and that identify the inherent risks. The use of the MAC method for risk assessment helps identify the nature of problems and the improvement potential. The solutions suggested in the follow-up to such assessments aim to eliminate excessive strains on workers, ensure effective improvements and raise efficiency.

The end result is safer manual handling and mitigation of the adverse financial consequences of incidents. Application of the MAC Method for Risk Assessment During … 289 References Batish A, Singh TP (2008) MHAC-an assessment tool for analysing manual material handling tasks. Int J Occup Safety Ergon 14(2):223–235 Bevan S (2015) Economic impact of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) on work in Europe.

Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 29(3):356–373 Bhattacharya A (2014) Costs of occupational musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in the United States. Int J Ind Ergon 44(3):448–454 Caroly S, Coutarel F, Landry A, Mary-Cheray I (2010) Sustainable MSD prevention: management for continuous improvement between prevention and production. Ergonomic intervention in two assembly line companies.

Appl Ergon 41(4):591–599 Chiasson ME, Imbeau D, Major J, Aubry K, Delisle A (2015) Influence of musculoskeletal pain on workers’ ergonomic risk-factor assessments.

Appl Ergon 49:1–7 Council Directive 89/391/EEC of 12 June 1989 on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work; OJ L 183, 29.6.1989, pp 1–8, as amended Council Directive 90/269/EEC of 29 May 1990 on the minimum health and safety requirements for the manual handling of loads where there is a risk particularly of back injury to workers (fourth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16(1) of Directive 89/391/EEC); OJ L 156, 21.6.1990, pp 9–13, as amended Enez K, Nalbantoğlu SS (2019) Comparison of ergonomic risk assessment outputs from OWAS and REBA in forestry timber harvesting.

Int J Ind Ergon 70:51–57 Goode N, Newnam S, Salmon PM (2019) Musculoskeletal disorders in the workplace: development of a systems thinking-based prototype classification scheme to better understand the risks. Saf Sci 120:146–156 Górny A (2017) The use of working environment factors as criteria in assessing the capacity to carry out processes. In: MATEC web of conferences, vol 94, p 06011 Górny A (2020) The ergonomics of work conditions as force element of the OHS management.

In: Murata A, Goossens RHM (eds) Advances in social and occupational ergonomics, advances in intelligent systems and computing, vol 970. Springer Nature Switzerland, pp 184–194 Harward J (2004) NIOSH workers health chartbook. In; NIOSH workers health chartbook. NIOSH Publishers, Washington, DC, pp 58–192 Manual handling assessment charts (the MAC tool), Health and Safety Executive, https://www.hse. gov.uk.

Accessed 20 Feb 2020 Monnington SC, Quarrie CJ, Pinder ARJ, Morris LA (2003) Development of manual handling assessment charts (MAC) for health and safety inspectors. In; McCabe PT (ed) Contemporary ergonomics, taylor & francis, London, New York, pp 2–7 Pandya MG, Desai DA (2019) Systematic review on various risk assessment techniques of musculoskeletal disorder. Ind Eng J 12(6):1–7 Pinder ADJ, Frost G (2011) Prospective evaluation of the Manual handling Assessment Charts.

Occup Environ Med 68(Suppl. 1):A73–A73 Pinder ADJ (2003) Benchmarking of health and safety inspectors’ manual handling assessment charts (MAC). In: McCabe PT (ed) Contemporary ergonomics, taylor & francis, London, New York, pp 14–19 Roman-Liu D (2014) Comparison of concepts in easy-to-use methods for MSD risk assessment. Appl Ergon 45(3):420–427 Sadłowska-Wrzesińska J, Górny A, Mościcka-Teske A (2016) The outcomes of shift working the context of psychosocial functioning-sex aspects.

In: Arezes PM et al (eds) Occupational safety and hygiene IV. CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton, pp 197–203 Sado F, Yap HJ, Ghazilla RAR, Ahmad N (2019) Design and control of a wearable lowerbody exoskeleton for squatting and walking assistance in manual handling works. Mechatronics 63:102272 290 A. Górny Salas EA, Vi P, Reider VL, Moore AE (2016) Factors affecting the risk of developing lower back musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in experienced and inexperienced rodworkers.

Appl Ergon 52:62–68 Working conditions in 2018 (2019), Statistics Poland, Statistical Office in Gdańsk, Warszawa, Gdańsk Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining, Analytics and Artificial Intelligence in the Logistics Departments Magdalena Graczyk-Kucharska , Maciej Szafrański , Selma Gütmen, Marek Goliński , Małgorzata Spychała , Gerhard-Wilhelm Weber , Zbigniew Włodarczak, Semih Kuter, and Ayşe Özmen Abstract As a result of the environment changes, all Logistic Departments need to cover gaps between their needs and possibilities in regard to resources potential available in market and customer requirements.

In addition to material re-sources, there are also intangible resources like knowledge, attitude and skills (part of HR). A pioneering mathematic-supported study was done with respect to technical skills of students from IT Departments at technical high schools. We achieve a mathematical model representing possible contributions of students into jobs through professional skills, subject to soft skills, common skills and other socio-economic variables in time.

A general aim is to explore the effects between variables, the structure, stability and sensitivity of the model. Thus, the needs in Logistics are addressed through decision aid, educational improvements, programs and measurements. We take a genuine lead to networking and modelling side of HRM by modern Data Mining, Analytics and AI. Herewith, human and educational factors are addressed in Logistics, eventually for a best balance between job offers and demands.

The resulting models are compared by the help of statistical performance criteria, they are discussed, interpreted, evaluated, and economic as well as educational implications are derived. Keywords Professional skills · Labor market · Supply chain management · Logistics · HRM · MARS · ANN M. Graczyk-Kucharska (B) · M. Szafrański · S. Gütmen · M. Goliński · M. Spychała · G.-W. Weber · Z. Włodarczak · A. Özmen Poznan University of Technology, Poznań ul.

Jacka Rychlewskiego 2, 60-965 Poznań, Polska e-mail: magdalena.graczyk-kucharska@put.poznan.pl S. Kuter Çankırı Karatekin University, Cankiri, Turkey © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_20 291 292 M. Graczyk-Kucharska et al.

1 Introduction Resources encompass everything that adds value to a product or service in the process of design, manufacture, delivery or use. Usually, one speaks of simple or complex resources, physical resources, financial resources, personal resources, information resources, tangible and intangible resources and internal and external resources in reference to a specific entity.

Given that the environment shapes ways of functioning on the market, decision-makers should take advantage of that impact, capitalizing on existing opportunities (potential, resources).

Resources which are a source of competitive advantage can be characterized in the operational sense by dividing them into: • tangible resources, • intangible resources, • capabilities—which enable effective use of organizational resources to generate value (Prahalad and Hamel 1990; Hall 1993; Hamel and Prahalad 1994; Mintzberg et al. 1998; Eisenhardt and Martin 2000).

Competence is often portrayed as a combination of components, such as knowledge, skills, abilities, capabilities and resources (Derwik and Hellström 2017) and in the times of knowledge management (source) it is the key value which supports competitive advantage building. In scientific literature, more and more emphasis is being put on competencies in the area of logistics, including supply chain management (Derwik et al. 2016), transport (Bazaras et al.

2016) or Logistic Enterprises on Service Innovation (Yang and Lu 2017). In the age of the globalization of the economy, the modern logistics industry has increasingly greater potential for fast and better development. In order to ensure such action, it is necessary to access resources, including skills that ensure and support planning, organization, realization and control of the company’s processes in order to meet its organizational objectives.

Although the issue is touched upon in many scientific articles, it is still not exhausted (Derwik et al. 2016), particularly in the context of mathematical modelling of the availability of resources in the context of competence needs in the area of logistics on the labour market.

It is the purpose of the article to present a mathematical model representing possible contributions of students into jobs through professional skills, subject to soft skills, common skills and other socio-economic variables in time. A general aim is to explore the effects between variables, the structure, stability and sensitivity of the model. The first part of the article presents a synthetic literature review in reference to competencies in the logistics sector.

It showcases research methods, i.e., the Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) and Artificial Neural Networks. The research part is characterized by a description of the data structure as well as the presentation and comparison of the models. The last part focuses on conclusions and outlook.

Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining … 293 2 The Importance of Competencies in Logistics The dynamic of changes in the economy is very intense, with it being particularly visible in the area of logistics where far-fetched market transformations have appeared in the practice of logistics and supply chain management (Derwik et al. 2016).

High competitiveness, complexity and uncertainty in the area of logistics forced companies to intensify active cooperation between human resources involved in the supply chain (Mendoza-Fong et al. 2020). The analysis of employer expectations concluded unambiguously that given such change dynamics, attention must be drawn to current employee competencies as well as the expected competencies as that guarantees success in the future (Palšaitis et al. 2017).

Based on literature analysis in the area of logistics (in any part of the world) both technical as well as social competencies and a theoretical background are needed and practice-based experience is required (Sangka et al. 2019; Lawrence et al. 2019; Takele 2019; Szafrański et al. 2019). Regardless of the logistics specialization and the employment level, the scope of the most important competencies also shows much repeatability in the analysed literature sources.

The key competencies which are sought in the area of logistics most often include “ability to manage under the pressure of work”, “crisis management skills”, “interpersonal skills”, “ability to use sources of information”, and “ability to effectively manage and motivate teamwork” (Spychała et al. 2017; Wróbel-Lachowska et al. 2017; Ding et al. 2019).

The issues of demand for human resources in logistics and ways of looking for proper employees for the company are of key importance to the companies’ success. The matters connected with high-quality talent and employee attraction are closely connected with HR management and due to the significant demand for employees in logistics and its global reach, recruitment processes are more and more often based on the Internet and social networks (Kiessling and Harvey 2014; Spychała et al. 2019).

The specifics of the logistics sector include the significant importance of professional experience as a precondition and an employability factor. It shows that logistics professions require a certain set of skills, therefore they demand trained and educated personnel. That confirms the expectations of professional logistics associations that predict demand for highly skilled staff in their sector.

Job offers in logistics are available to people on all education levels, combine competencies from different sectors, careers can develop in a very wide area and there are more and more opportunities for the employment of women (Rudy 2012; Pearson 2015). Human resources are an important element in the rivalry of businesses, they are correlated and equally important as infrastructure and legal regulations (Melliana et al. 2019).

Particularly in the logistics sector, one can see big influence of choices of proper employee competencies on the effectiveness and efficiency of activities and thus competitiveness of the company, which is particularly visible in the era of Industry 4.0 (Melliana et al. 2019; Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 2018; Goliński and Mi˛adowicz 2019). 294 M. Graczyk-Kucharska et al. Competence acquisition in the logistics sector is a continuous process.

With respect to high-school technical professional education and university education, literature indicates that apart from acquiring basic skills and competencies, students need to be opened to continuing training at the workplace. Schools and universities should develop close cooperation with logistics companies and offer postgraduate studies or courses in order to continuously train logistic personnel to adjust to the changing needs of the sector (Kotzab et al. 2018).

When the employability of school and university graduates is a key factor that affects the development of the entire economy, professional improvement should be subject to continuous development. Many educational solutions are today based on remote internet training and simulations (Butin 2006; Saifudin et al. 2015).

The use of simulation methods has been popularized for years particularly for promising sectors in which teaching rare and innovative competencies might involve significant costs (Thai 2012). 3 Methodology 3.1 Artificial Neural Network (ANN) Inspired by the biological nervous system, artificial neural network technology is being used to solve a wide variety of complex scientific, engineering, and business problems (Haykin and Network 2004).

An ANN makes it possible to create complex non-linear models relatively easily, by “learning” from the presented examples (Fausett 1994). A neural network consists of a large number of simple processing elements that are variously called neurons or nodes. Each neuron is connected to other neurons by means of direct communication links, each with an associated weight. The weights represent information being used by the net to solve a problem.

The neural network usually has two or more layers of neurons in order to process non-linear signals (Haykin and Network 2004). A neuron receives multiple inputs from different sources, and has a single output. There are various functions used for activation (Vanneschi and Castelli 2019). One of the problems that may occur during neural network training is called overfitting.

The error on the training set is driven to a very small value, but when new data is presented to the network the error is large. One of the frequently used methods for improving network generalization is to use an adequate-size network, which is just large enough to provide an adequate fit. The larger a network is, the more complex are the functions that the network can create which may cause overfitting.

If we use a small enough network, it will not have enough power to over fit the data (Demuth and Beale 1998). It is difficult to know beforehand how large a network should be for a specific application (Fletcher and Goss 1993).

Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining … 295 3.2 Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) is an innovative and flexible modelling tool that automates the building of accurate predictive models for continuous and binary dependent variables. It is a non-parametric regression method in which no assumption is made regarding the functional relationship between dependent and independent variables.

Instead, MARS builds this relationship from a set of coefficients and basic functions, which in turn are heavily influenced by the regression of the data. The operating method involves partitioning the area of entry into regions, each with its own regression equation (Hill and Lewicki 2006). The MARS method creates a regression equation for each region.

MARS regression model is defined as Y = c0 + N n=1 cn Bn (X) + ε (1) where Bn : n-th basis function from the set of basic functions, cn : coefficient of n-th basis function, c0 : constant “absolute” coefficient, ε: random noise term (Friedman 1991). Its non-parametric nature, its transparency in terms of the relevant variables, and its adaptability to the data give MARS great potential as a multi-spectral classifier (Molina et al. 1994).

The basic advantages of the MARS method compared to other methods is the fact that its use does not require any specific and restrictive special assumptions about the functional connections between dependent and independent variables. An important feature of MARS is the nature of the variables it operates on—they can have a nonparametric form and a multidimensional range.

When developing a database for calculations at the input to the analysis, no list of assumptions about the type of dependencies between independent and dependent variables is required. Thanks to these MARS features, the method is very useful in applying to inferences using large amounts of various data. MARS method is often interchangeably used with methods using an Artificial Neural Network, imitating a biological neural network (Merolla et al. 2014).

Both techniques are successfully employed in social research and technical sciences because as accurate tools they allow the identification of many, even very small dependencies, and ultimately the development of an over-fit model. 296 M. Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 4 Data Preparation The analysis was based on the data collected in the project Time of Professionals— Wielkopolskie professional education.

The collected data come from the years 2013– 2015 and concern a comparison of skills sought on the labour market with skills held by potential job candidates. Skills of every student were not compared with the skills required in every offer; instead, the data were linked with one another if the student was interested in a given offer. The other data selection criterion, apart from time, was the limitation of the area of interest to skills connected with the profession of the logistics technician.

The skills were attributed according to the curriculum for teaching the profession of the logistics technician which was in effect at the time. In the description of the profession, the curriculum is divided into three categories: professional (Z), common for the educational area (O) and common for all the professions (W ). Every individual skill which is an element of a logistics employee’s skills is attributed to exactly one of the aforementioned categories.

The categories were selected as the aggregating criterion as part of which indicators X O , X Z , Y W , X 2O , X 2Z , Y 2W were computed.

Due to the method chosen for the analyses of the dependencies, data which contained incomplete information about the student regarding their gender, date of birth, district of residence and about the offer regarding the work commencement date and the district where the offer maker is seated were additionally removed from the set of data which met the aforementioned criteria of selection.

As a consequence, the authors arrived at 1436 records containing student_id and offer_id identifier pairs together with the properties and indicators which describe them. The data used in the analysis were aggregated in the table composed of 21 data columns including, e.g., gender, date of profile creation, common skills, general skills.

Due to the requirements of the method chosen for the data analysis, all source data were recoded to the numerical format according to the following rule: • data type: a conversion involved transforming the data into the number of days which passed from 1999-12-31 to the specified date, • logical type: converted from 0–1 to 1–2, • text type: a numerical identifier was chosen for every value.

5 Models The main aim is to obtain a model which shows the relations between dependent variable and independent variables. Firstly, as pre-processing part, the collected data has been arranged and predictor and response variables have been decided (cf. Sect. 3). Later on, the dataset of 1436 real-life observations was divided into 2 groups by random sampling method as %70 of the whole dataset for training with 1035 cases, and %30 for testing with 401 cases.

Herewith, while MARS will be applied as a Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining … 297 fundamental model, ANN will be particularly employed to compare with the MARS results. In this work, results will be shown only for the train dataset. All results including the test performance, will be presented during further works.

5.1 MARS Model In MARS methodology, in order to get an optimal model, we started with determining a maximum number of basis functions, a number of interactions, a penalty and a threshold value in statistical software Statistica 13.3. At the beginning of MARS’ forward step, maximum number of BFs, M max , has been preassigned as 90, while the maximal degree of interactions is 2.

After pruning in the MARS’ backward stage, the number of BFs got down to 54, and the number of terms has been decided by MARS as 33. We concluded both MARS’ forward and backward steps by addressing Generalized Cross-Validation (GCV) as introduced in Sect. 3.

In consequence, the best MARS model with its BFs is shown as follows: Y Z = − 8.7247 − 7, 7882 · max{0, X 7 − 5.156} − 7.9166 · max{0, 5.156 − X 7 }+ 1.7764 · max{0, X 6 − 5.157} + 1.7933 · max{0, 5.157 − X 6 } + 3.1182 · max{0, X 4 − 5.280} + 6.2939 · max{0, 5.280 − X 4 } − 1.3311 · max{0, X 6 − 5.248} + 1.84 · max{0, 5.28 − X 4 } · max{0, X O − 1.2} − 1.6050 · max{0, X 2 + 1.274} + 2.156 · max{0, X 4 − 5.28} · max{0, X 5 − 5.622} + 1.191 · max{0, 5.28 − X 4 } · max{0, X 7 − 5.156} − 1.7899 · max{0, 5.28 − X 4 } · max{0, X 7 − 5.191} − 2.024 · max{0, X 5 − 5.714} · max{0, X 6 − 5.248} − 4.38 · max{0, X 6 − 5.248} · max{0, 1.3 − X W } + 1.166 · max{0, X 2 + 1.52} − 7.9212 · max{0, −1.274 − X 2 } · max{0, 5.172 − X 7 } + 1.4416 · max{0, −1.274 − X 2 } · max{0, 5.539 − X 6 } + 1.6691 · max{0, −1.274 − X 2 } · max{0, X 4 − 5.233} − 5.5611 · max{0, −1.274 − X 2 } · max{0, 5.233 − X 4 } − 1.259 · max{0, X 1 − 1} · max{0, X 6 − 5.157} + 1.2833 · max{0, X 1 − 1} · max{0, X 7 − 5.156} − 7.39 · max{0, X 13 − 1} − 1.615 · max{0, 5.156 − X 7 } · max{0, X W − 6.6} − 2.3787 · max{0, 5.28 − X 4 } · max{0, X W − 9.4} + 1.1838 · max{0, 5.28 − X 4 } · max{0, X W − 6.1} − 2.583 · max{0, X 5 − 5.568} · max{0, X 7 − 5.156} + 3.5333 · max{0, X 3 − 5.516} · max{0, X W − 0}+ 4.4346 · max{0, X 2 + 7.69} · max{0, 9.4 − X W } − 4.548 · max{0, X 2 + 1.52}· max{0, X W − 1.3} + ε.

In our MARS model, 10 variables seem important, or centrally involved statistically, among 15 input variables. These affecting variables are: student’s gender (X 1 ), student’s birthday (X 2 ), student’s profile creation date (X 3 ), job offer visible from 298 M. Graczyk-Kucharska et al.

(X 4 ), job offer visible to (X 5 ), job offer date of work start (X 6 ), job offer date of creation (X 7 ), whether job offer and student are in the same country (X 13 ), student’s total evaluation value of common skills (X O ), and student’s total evaluation value of general skills (X W ). Hence, it is astonishing that 6 of 10 predictors are related to time and in our MARS model we have all time variables.

This shows that time is particularly important for our model and applications in human resource management of the logistics sector. 5.2 Artificial Neural Network Design The ANN models were generated in MATLAB. A multilayer feedforward ANN with one hidden layer was employed in the study. The network had 15 nodes in the input layer and 1 node in the output layer, i.e., the number of nodes in the input and output layers were set equal to the number of predictor and response variables, respectively.

Gradient-based Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) back-propagation was used as network training algorithm. Hyperbolic tangent was used as transfer function in both input and output layers. Gradient-based Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) back-propagation was selected as network training algorithm. The number of neurons in the hidden layer was decided through a trial-and-error approach by varying the number of neurons from the set {7, 10, 13, 16, 19, 22, 25, 27, 29, 31}.

Related information about ANNs can be found in (Haykin and Network 2004; Fausett 1994). Since an ANN comes from a computational family of methods, it shows the results just as an input-output automaton. In ANN methodology, because of the implicit and hidden of finding y, it does not provide an analytic understanding about which predictors play an affecting role, and with which sensitivities, as it is possible by our MARS model explicitly.

Hence, for ANN techniques, we cannot assess and quantify the important variables and their contributions in our setting from logistics and education. 6 Comparison of the Models For the comparison of the two methods’ performances, the results obtained from the training dataset were evaluated in this work. Before comparing an optimal MARS model with best ANN system, we decided about our model and systems among other possible cases, respectively.

In order to do that, we addressed the first order performance criteria: Absolute Average Error (AAE), Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), and then continue with checking the second order performance criteria: Multiple Coefficient of Determination (Adjusted R2 ) and Correlation Coefficient (R). The comparison has shown accuracy and stability performance within the scope of statistical evaluation. Through these criteria, we measured the predictive capability of the models.

Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining … 299 7 Professional Skills Training Table 1 shows the comparison result of MARS with two selected best ANNs called ANN1 and ANN2 . In the table, both ANN systems represent different numbers of nodes: 25 and 10, respectively. In comparison, MARS has different performances with respect to different ANNs. In the first case, while MARS does not perform well enough compare to ANN1 , in the second case, MARS works better than ANN2 .

The two approaches show that MARS plays a very competitive role when comparing with ANN for the matched areas of Logistics and Education. Overall, in our study, MARS has proven to be equally well against its ANN counterpart. In Fig. 1, the histogram demonstrates that residuals, as a sample of the noise terms in the model, accumulated around mean 0.

Mostly, the squared residuals have Table 1 Results of statistical performance criteria based on training dataset for MARS and ANN1 Professional skills training MARS ANN1 ANN2 AAE 17.7119 14.5708 19.2966 RMSE 25.8319 23.1142 29.1537 Adjusted R2 0.6206 0.6836 0.5240 R 0.7910 0.8359 0.7345 Histogram of Y_z (Res. Sqd.) 1100 1000 900 Number of obs erv ations 800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 -4000 0 -2000 4000 2000 8000 6000 12000 10000 16000 14000 20000 18000 Y_z (Res. Sqd.) Fig.

1 The squared residuals related to our MARS model, based on training dataset 24000 22000 300 M. Graczyk-Kucharska et al. their value close to 0. (For closer statistical discussions we refer to (Aster et al. 2018). Our good performance criteria’s results also imply the characteristic of our dataset in terms of complexity and accuracy properties in despite of our dataset is inhomogeneous and nonconvex.

We also recall that MARS, differently from Linear model, does not need a particular distribution assumption. 8 Conclusion and Outlook The application of MARS in comparison with ANN delivered extremely promising results with respect to the analysis and creation of decision-supporting models, taking into account significant variables in order to match professional competencies in the area of logistics with the needs of the labor market.

The analyses made it possible to study the key variables out of the 21 analyzed ones, with as many as 6 out of 10 of them referring to time. The conclusions in that area are unambiguous. The works connected with the spatiotemporal analysis in the context of competencies need to be continued and improved. The aspect is important from the point of view of improving the competencies of candidates and adjustment to the needs of employers in the logistics sector.

It might also be important to public education institutions which should flexibly respond to the needs of the labor market and the employers’ demand for specific competencies in the era of continuous technological changes as well as social, ecological and health-related challenges. In further studies, there are many challenges connected with the continuation of the works.

Further activities should include spatiotemporal analyses, taking into account other macroeconomic factors such as unemployment, the gross domestic product, level of employment in the sector, number of logistics companies or their location. The location and availability of competency resources might also be significant in the context of mobility of human resources. There are certain limitations to the study results.

The data for the research were collected in the period of 2013–2015 and thus they might differ significantly from the current needs of the labor market. It is the case because, over that time, unemployment in the Wielkopolskie province decreased from 6.8% reported in 2013 to 3.1% in 2020. Therefore, the studies should also encompass the current time horizon and up-to-date indices and companies’ demand for competency needs of young candidates.

The other important limitation is the fact that the studies were carried out in Wielkopolska which is one of 16 provinces in Poland. Wielkopolska is a region of nearly 3.5 million inhabitants and, despite the intentional choice in the project Time of Professional BIS—professional Wielkopolska, the samples are so big that they cover nearly 28% of all students learning the profession of the logistics technician at the time.

The third and the last limitation is the difficulty in acquiring data for analyses in the context of intangible resources, in this case, competencies. The analyzed data are based on self-evaluation of competencies and the level of their mastering.

However, it is worth emphasizing that the analyzed competency profiles of candidates learning to be logistics employees were most often created under teacher supervision and thanks Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining … 301 to being able to talk to the instructor, it was easier for the students to understand separate skills and evaluate them correctly.

The results of the studies confirm that it is worth continuing the works on statistical analyses possibilities in the context of human resources modelling on the labor market. The developed MARS model generates promising results regarding its use in further studies.

Comparing the performance criteria, the MARS model provides comparable and, depending on the ANN model, also better results, a fact which makes us inclined to broaden the data for the analyzed factors and develop increasingly more accurate models describing the needs in the logistics sector. Further works connected with data and competence models on the labor market concern applying MARS (Kuter et al.

2018) and ANN, and further data mining methods: RMARS (Robust MARS) (Özmen and Weber 2014), CMARS (Conic MARS) (Kuter et al. 2015), RCMARS (Özmen et al. 2014), to represent and understand P, O and G, comparing all models and systems by statistical performance criteria, error diagrams and sensitivity analyses.

Acknowledgements We would like to thank the Regional Government of the Wielkopolskie Province—The Partner and Leading Partner in projects supporting the activities for the use of data for the purposes of improving education processes for the needs of a knowledge-based economy, including projects such as The Wielkopolska System for Monitoring and Forecasting, Time of Professionals—Wielkopolska vocational education, Time of Professional BIS—professional Wielkopolska which are funded from WRPO programs.

References Aster R, Borchers B, Thurber C (2018) parameter estimation and inverse problems. 3rd Edn, Elsevier Bazaras D, Čižiūnienė K, Palšaitis R, Kabashkin I (2016) Competence and capacity-building requirements in transport and logistics market. Transp Telecommun J 17(1):1–8 Butin DW (2006) The limits of service-learning in higher education. Rev Higher Educ 29(4):473– 498 Demuth H, Beale M (1998) Neural network toolbox for using Mathlab—user’s guide.

MathWorks Inc, 24 Prime Park Way, Natick, MA Derwik P, Hellström D, Karlsson S (2016) Manager competences in logistics and supply chain practice. J Busin Res 69(11):4820–4825 Derwik P, Hellström D (2017) Competence in supply chain management: a systematic review. Supply Chain Manag: Int J 22(2):200–218 Ding JF, Kuo JF, Tai WH (2019) Using fuzzy AHP method to evaluate key competency and capabilities of selecting middle managers for global shipping logistics service providers.

Pomorstvo 33(1):3–10 Eisenhardt KM, Martin JA (2000) dynamic capabilities: what are they? Strategic Manag J 21:1105– 1121 Fausett L (1994) Fundamentals of neural networks. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ Fletcher D, Goss E (1993) Forecasting with Neural Networks: an application using bankruptcy data. Inf Manag 24:159–167 Friedman JH (1991) Multivariate adaptive regression splines. Ann Statist 19(1):1–67 302 M. Graczyk-Kucharska et al.

Goliński M, Mi˛adowicz M (2019) management of employee competencies in resource management of an enterprise. In: ECKM 2019 20th European Conference on Knowledge Management Vol 2. Academic Conferences and publishing limited, 405–414 Graczyk-Kucharska M, Szafranski M, GolinskiM, Spychala M, Borsekova K (2018) Model of competency management in the network of production enterprises in industry 4.0—Assumptions. In: Advances in manufacturing.

Springer, Cham, 195–204 Hall PA (1993) Policy paradigms, social learning, and the state: the case of economic policymaking in Britain. Comparative politics, 275-296 Hamel G, Prahalad CK (1994) Competing for the future. Harvard Busin Rev 72(4):122–128 Haykin S, Network N (2004) A comprehensive foundation. Neural Netw 2:41 Hill T, Lewicki P (2006) Statistics: methods and applications. a comprehensive reference for science, Industry and Data Minining.

StatSoft; Tulsa, OK, USA Kiessling T, Harvey M (2014) Human resource management issues associated with the globalization of supply chain management and logistics. Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manag 44(8/9) Kotzab H, Teller C, Bourlakis M, Wünsche S (2018) Key competences of logistics and SCM professionals—the lifelong learning perspective.

Supply Chain Manag Int J 23(1):50–64 Kuter SZ, Akyurek Z, Weber G-W (2018) Retrieval of fractional snow covered area from MODIS data by multivariate adaptive regression splines. Remote Sens of Environ 205:236–252 Kuter S, Weber G-W, Akyürek Z, Özmen A (2015) Inversion of top of atmospheric reflectance values by conic multivariate adaptive regression splines.

Inverse Problems Sci Eng (IPSE) 23(4):651–669 Lawrence JM, Hossain NUI, Nagahi M, Jaradat R (2019) Impact of a cloud-based applied supply chain network simulation tool on developing systems thinking skills of undergraduate students (Conference Paper). Proceedings of the International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, 4th North American IEOM Conference. IEOM 201. Holiday Inn Toronto International Airport Toronto. Canada, 23-25.10.

878–889 Melliana Sinulingga S, Nasution H, Matondang N (2019) Impact competence of human resources and infrastructure in logistic performance improvement.

IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 1st International Conference on Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, ICI and ME 2018, Medan City North Sumatera, Indonesia 505(1) Melliana, Sinulingga S, Nasution H, Matondang N (2019a) Competence model of human resources, infrastructure, and regulation in improving logistics performance.

Int J Civil Eng Technol 10(1):2577–2586 Mendoza-Fong JR, García-Alcaraz JL, Marmolejo-Saucedo JA, Díaz-Reza JR (2020) Impact of managers and human resources on the supply chain performance. Techniques tools and methodologies applied to global supply chain ecosystems.

Springer, Cham, pp 3–23 Merolla PA, Arthur JV, Alvarez-Icaza R, Cassidy AS, Sawada J, Akopyan F, Jackson BF, Imam N, Guo Ch, Nakamura Y, Brezzo B, Vo I, Esser SK, Appuswamy R, Taba B, Amir A, Flickner MD, RiskW P, Manohar R, Modha DS (2014) A million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communication network and interface. Science 345(6197):668–673 Mintzberg H, Ahlstrand B, Lampel J (1998) Strategy safari: a guided tour through the wilds of strategic management.

Prentice-Hall, New York Molina R, De la Blanca NP, Taylor CC (1994) Modern statistical techniques. Machine learning, neural and statistical classification, 29–49 Özmen A, Weber GW (2014) RMARS: robustification of multivariate adaptive regression spline under polyhedral uncertainty. J Comput Appl Math 259:914–924 Özmen A, Batmaz I, Weber G-W (2014) Precipitation modeling by polyhedral RCMARS and comparison with MARS and CMARS.

Environ Model Assess 19(82):425–435 Palšaitis R, Čižiūnienė K, Vaičiūtė K (2017) Improvement of warehouse operations management by considering competencies of human resources. Procedia Eng 187:604–613 Pearson M (2015) Pearson on Excellence: Exception management is becoming the rule [WWW Document]. http://www.logisticsmgmt.com/article/pearson_on_excellence_exception_ management_is_becoming_the_rule.

Accessed 28 Feb 2020 Modeling for Human Resources Management by Data Mining … 303 Prahalad CK, Hamel G (1990) The core competence of the corporation. Harvard Bus Rev 68(3):79– 91 Rudy P (2012) Ten reasons you should consider a career in logistics [WWW Document].

http:// www.supplychaindigital.com/top10/2512/Ten-Reasons-You-Should-Consider-a-Career-in-Log istics Accessed10 April 2012 Saifudin AM, Zainuddin N, Bahaudin AY, Zalazilah MH, Jamaludin R (2015) Enriching students’ experience in logistics and transportation through simulation. Int J Econ Financ Issues 5(1S):343– 348 Sangka BK, Rahman S, Yadlapalli A, Jie F (2019) Managerial competencies of 3PL providers a comparative analysis of Indonesian firms and multinational companies.

Int J Logist Manag 30(4):1054–1077 Spychała M, Goliński M, Szafrański M, Graczyk-Kucharska M (2019) Competency models as modern tools in the recruitment process of employees. In: European conference on intangibles and intellectual capital. Academic Conferences International Limited, 282–291 Spychała M, Szafrański M, Graczyk-Kucharska M, Goliński M (2017) The method of designing reference models of workstations. In: European conference on knowledge management.

Academic Conferences International Limited, 930–939 Szafrański M, Goliński M, Graczyk-Kucharska M, Spychała M (2019) Cooperation of education and enterprises in improving professional competences-analysis of needs. Int Scient-Techn Conf Manuf. Springer, Cham, pp 155–168 Takele TB (2019) The relevance of coordinated regional trade logistics for the implementation of regional free trade area of Africa.

J Transp Supply Chain Manag 13(1):1–11 Thai VV (2012) Competency requirements for professionals in logistics and supply chain management. Int J Logist Res Appl 15(2):109–126 Wrobel-Lachowska M, Wisniewski Z, Polak-Sopinska A, Lachowski R (2017) ICT in logistics as a challenge for mature workers. Knowledge management role in information society. In: International conference on applied human factors and ergonomics.

Springer, Cham, 171–178 Yang B, Lu J (2017, February) Empirical research on the factors affecting core competence evolution of logistics enterprises based on service innovation. In: 2017 international conference on humanities science, management and education technology (HSMET 2017). Atlantis Press, 1205–1209 Vanneschi L, Castelli M (2019) Multilayer perceptrons.

Encyclopedia of Bioinformatics Comput Biol Refer Module Life Sci 1:612–620 Modeling and Optimization of the Supply Chain and Logistics Operations Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions Katarzyna Grzybowska and Agnieszka Stachowiak Abstract The base of knowledge related to supply chain (SC) research is dynamically expanding.

The growing trend of publishing scientific papers on the subject is observable, which indicates that the supply chain concept is in the centre of attention of scientists and researchers. It can be assumed that the tendency will continue. This proves the expansive nature of research in the analysed area. The goal of the chapter to present the classify trends and development directions of supply chains.

The goal is of cognitive and conceptual character and the research implemented benefits from text mining method. Research is necessary from academic perspective, not only to organize the knowledge but also to identify future research potential. To achieve the research goal, an original methodology was designed by selecting research methods and tools to answer comprehensively to the research questions.

The importance of research results for the development of supply chain, management and quality science is indisputable. Research to be conducted strives to prove that heterogeneity, multifacetedness and multi-directionality of research on supply chain is a difficult but definable phenomenon. Keywords Supply chain management · Green supply chain · Sustainable supply chain · Flexible supply chain · Service supply chain 1 Introduction The supply chains are in a state of transformation.

The better we understand the future needs, the better modern and future supply chain will function. Supply chains are inherently complex, dynamic (Surana et al. 2005) and dispersed and open systems (Grzybowska and Hoffa 2015).

Collaboration across SC partners K. Grzybowska (B) · A. Stachowiak Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland e-mail: katarzyna.grzybowska@put.poznan.pl A. Stachowiak e-mail: agnieszka.stachowiak@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_21 307 308 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak has to be smart, innovative to form value-creating networks. So, we see a different kinds of supply chain, different trends of supply chain. It can be observed that the amount of knowledge related to research on supply chains is significantly spreading.

The growing trend of publishing scientific papers can be observed, which indicates that research on the concept of supply chains is still in the spotlight of scientists and researchers (Hoffa-D˛abrowska et al. 2020). The supply chains are in a state of transformation. The transformation of the supply chain of today to the supply chain of the future is an enormous task. The better we understand the future needs, the better smart and sustainable supply chain will function.

The publication aims at presenting the classify trends and development directions of supply chains. Research to be conducted strives to prove that heterogeneity, multifacetedness and multi-directionality of research on supply chain is a difficult but definable phenomenon. The structure of the work is as follows: Sect. 2 presents the literature review. The subsequent part of the article discussed the research methods. Section 4 focuses on and comments results of the research– presents the main trends.

The paper is finished with a summary. 2 Supply Chain—Literature Review Nowadays, changes are faster and more unpredictable. Supply chains must respond quickly to challenges and opportunities in the business world. This makes supply chains evolve and adapt. Global competition and rapidly changing expectations and requirements of the final customer force major changes in the style and configuration of business organizations and supply chains.

The sequential and centralized system is not flexible enough to meet these expectations. Industry 4.0 and Circular Economy together have motivated business organizations to evolve towards effective and prompt sustainable supply chain management (Ballouki et al. 2017; Hernández et al. 2014; Lv 2017). It can be observed that the amount of knowledge related to research on supply chains is significantly spreading (Fig. 1).

The growing trend of publishing scientific papers can be observed, which indicates that research on the concept of supply chains is still in the spotlight of scientists and researchers. With access to the global market, the supply chain is becoming increasingly important.

Interest in the supply chain concept results from the significant commitment of theorists and practitioners to the integrated flow of goods from the supplier to the final customer in an increasingly turbulent, unpredictable and global market. It was in the 1980s that organizational solutions and the overall concept of supply chain management became an alternative to the traditional (usually transactional) way of seeing relationships and doing business between cooperating suppliers and customers.

Since then, this concept has developed significantly in both the theory Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 309 Fig. 1 Number of publications in the area of supply chain research (Hoffa-D˛abrowska et al. 2020) and practice of logistics management. As a consequence, we also have much more knowledge about organization, functioning and supply chain management (Mentzer et al. 2001; Nagurney 2006).

3 Research Methods In order to accomplish with the objective of investigating classify trends and development directions of supply chains used an initial search for relevant publications using a literature review. Have been used Web of Science and Scopus databases. This is in line with the recommendations regarding the number of databases used (Green et al. 2006). The literature review was carried out in three steps, in accordance with guidelines (Strozzi et al.

2017, 2–3): 1. identifying the scope of the analysis, 2. identifying and locating keywords, type of documents, language, databases, 3. selection, assessment and synthesis of the existing set of completed, reviewed and registered in the analysed base of scientific papers, developed by researchers, scientists and practitioners.

The method of bibliometric analysis adopted was the Systematic Literature Network Analysis (SLNA) method introduced by Colicchia and Strozzi (2012), which combines Literature Review and analysis and visualization of a bibliographic network.

Adopting this approach allows the identification of trends of key issues that affect the development of knowledge in a given field in a more scientific and objective way than descriptive reviews, which are based on subjective criteria for the selection of works and the classification of research input. As a result of literature review, a set of keywords has been identified that were used to collect metadata from Web of Science and Scopus databases.

As a result of this action, a set of concepts was identified. The basic term “Supply Chain” (SC) has 310 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak been identified in the collection. The set of concepts has been narrowed down to the “Management” science category. Research and creation of a local base was carried out in January 2020. Scientific publications from 1989–2019 were searched with the term ‘Supply Chain’ in their title, abstract or keywords.

The initial search for the defined basic concept of “Supply Chain” included 60,652 references, not including identifying the type of publication or science category. Then the search was narrowed down to the set of keyword and science category indicated earlier (management). The total number of searched publications is 13,274. A local database was created, which was saved on an external computer storage medium and used for further analysis.

Further refinement of search results was narrowed down to selected types of scientific publications. For analysis were selected publications that were subject to the review process: (1) articles from scientific journals, (2) articles as part of conference proceedings and (3) chapters in edited books. Duplicates have also been removed. Subsequent search attempts yielded a total of 13,148 scientific publications (Fig. 2).

Statistics show that for the publication of scientific articles published by scientific journals, two of them contributed to the publication of 1,730 identified scientific articles. This represents 13.16% of all published papers of this type. The dominant magazine is “European Journal of Operational Research”. As part of the magazine, a total of 1,089 searched scientific publications were published. It is a prestigious scientific journal about operations management and operational research.

It is worth noting that “European Journal of Operational Research” as the most-published journal from the studied area is located in the area of operations and operational research, not supply chain management. This suggests that there is a strong connection between these two disciplines. For the surveyed population of 13,148 identified scientific publications, statistics show that researchers from the United States (3,679) and China (3,470) dominate in the analyzed set of scientific papers.

It is a leadership that significantly contributes Fig. 2 Summary of the Systematic Literature Review. Developed by the authors Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 311 to the development of the studied area. They published a total of 7,149 scientific papers. This gives a rate of 54.37%. England comes in third with 1,202 publications.

4 Identification of Main Trends As a result of the above actions, a total of 23,701 keywords were specified that describe the scientific papers identified in the local database over the years 1989– 2019. Among them was a set of keywords that take into account the minimum occurrence of keywords. Their total number is 965 expressions. On their basis, a semantic map was developed for the examined period (Fig. 3).

The collection of scientific publications from the analyzed period can be divided into seven clusters (Fig. 3). The collection of scientific publications from the analyzed period can be divided into seven clusters (Fig. 3). Cluster 1 (red area) consists of 296 keywords and relates, among others, to aspects of Behavioral Supply Management. The BSM is define as the study of how judgment in supply management decision-making deviates from the assumptions of homo economicus.

This cluster concern issues related to integration and relationships in supply chains, too. Concern issues related to integration and relationships in supply chains. Cluster 1 also includes problems related to: (1) supply chain collaboration, (2) Fig. 3 Visualization of the semantic network. Developed by the authors 312 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak supply chain flexibility, (3) supply chain integration, (4) supply chain performance, (5) supply chain relationships, (6) supply chain structure.

Two more clusters concern the greening and social sustainability of supply chains. Cluster 2 (green area) grouped keywords that relate to three supply chain development trends: Closed-loop Supply Chain and Reverse Supply Chain. These two trends are universally recognised as two environmentally friendly practices that could help in greening conventional supply chains.

This area also touches on problems related to (1) supply chain contracts, (2) supply chain coordination, (3) supply chain finance, (4) supply chain network, (5) supply chain planning. This cluster consists of 258 keywords. In the next cluster 3 (blue area) 157 keywords were grouped. This area puts emphasis on topics related to responsible, sustainable and ecological problems of the modern business world.

Green capability is characterized in terms of product recovery, supply chain integration, and environmentally. Global competition and rapidly changing expectations and requirements of the final customer force major changes in the style and configuration of supply chains. The following development trends can be identified here: Green Supply Chain, Sustainable Supply Chain, Food Supply Chain and Global Supply Chain. In cluster 3 a clear problem area was identified: supply chain sustainability.

The yellow area (cluster 4) includes 113 keywords. Two other emerging supply chain development trends have been identified here, i.e. Humanitarian Supply Chain and Service Supply Chain. Problems have also been reported: (1) supply chain agility, (2) supply chain strategy. Cluster 5 (purple area) concerns new technologies. Along with the development of artificial intelligence and intelligent agent technology, topics related to intelligent solutions are taken up.

The following problems that supply chains have identified here are: (1) supply chain innovation, (2) supply chain processes, (3) supply chain visibility. The last of the identified clusters (sea area), cluster 6, consists of 62 scientific concepts. Issues of disruption, risk and reliability are becoming particularly important in supply chains.

Risk, disruptions and uncertainty are becoming the main factors limiting the achievement of a high level of supply chain efficiency and disturbing the current functioning of cooperating companies in the supply chains. They concern a group of problems: (1) supply chain complexity, (2) supply chain design, (3) supply chain disruption, (4) supply chain resilience, (5) supply chain risk, (6) supply chain security. The next part discusses the key development trends of modern supply chains.

4.1 Closed-loop Supply Chain The Closed-loop Supply Chain is the concept based on integration of primary flows, between supplier and customer, and reverse flows, between customers and vendors. Closed-loop supply chains (CLSC) are supply chain networks that “include the Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 313 returns processes and the manufacturer has the intent of capturing additional value and further integrating all supply chain activities” (Guide et al. 2003).

The definitions refer also to Close-loop Supply Chain Management which is design, control, and operation of a system to maximize value creation over the entire life cycle of a product with dynamic recovery of value from different types and volumes of returns over time. Closed-loop Supply Chain is the most comprehensive and holistic trend in research on supply chains, covering the forward and backward flows of material, benefiting from reverse logistics concept (Hosseini-Motlagh et al. 2020).

4.2 Reverse Supply Chain Reverse Supply Chain is complementary to supply chain in its traditional meaning, these chains integrated constitute Closed-loop Supply Chain (Frei et al. 2020).

Hence, the Reverse Supply Chain is responsible for flows initiated by customers and eventually expected by the vendors Reverse Supply Chain benefits from reverse logistics which is the process is the process of planning, implementing and controlling the efficient and effective inbound flow and storage of secondary goods and related information for the purpose of recovering value or proper disposal (Stock 1992).

The concept is one of the oldest development concepts for supply chains and evolved over time in works by (Stock 1998) and (Rogers and Tibben-Lembke 1999) who greatly popularized the idea not only among academics (in Web of Science Core collection there is over 3000 publications on “reverse logistics” indexed since 1992), but also among business.

The dissemination of Reverse Supply Chains and reverse logistics in business was greatly supported by the list of expected benefits from Reverse Supply chain implementation which include pro-longing product lifecycles, decreased lead time in production, improved image of company and many others. 4.3 Green Supply Chain The Green Supply Chain idea focuses on ecological aspects of supply chain organization and management (Abdi et al. 2020).

The key issue in Green Supply Chain concept is to reduce environmental pollution generated on the supply chain scale by implementation of green practices in business operations (Beamon 1999). Practices, such as green purchasing, cooperation with customers, eco-design, and investment recovery, are designed to positively impact environmental performance, moreover there are models proving their direct and positive impact on operational performance (Green et al. 2012).

There is some ambiguity between Green Supply Chain and Sustainable Supply Chain since they emerged in the same time. The ambiguity may be clearly explained, as the first concept is to be driven by ecological and economic factors while the latter with ecological, economic and factors. Nevertheless, many researchers use both terms interchangeably.

Considering time frame, Green Supply 314 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak Chain is the concept older and more often considered as the research topic (in Web of Science Core collection there is over 1600 publications on “green supply chain” indexed since 1997 and their number is growing dynamically after 2010). 4.4 Sustainable Supply Chain The trend recognized as Sustainable Supply Chain refers to the idea of sustainability and its implementation to supply chain structure (Mardani et al. 2020).

The generic term for sustainability is sustainable development which is defined as “a development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”(WCED 1987). Since the term is general it requires operationalization which is usually provided by implementing the so-called triple bottom line approach.

The approach encompasses three dimensions: economic, social and environmental (Elkington 2002) the combination and balance of which is supposed to result in equilibrium in economy. The Sustainable Supply Chain requires a broadened approach to the Supply Chain (Grzybowska 2012). In the case of sustainable or “green” SCM, sup-ply chain members are encouraged to fulfil customers’ needs concerning ecological or social products (Zhu and Sarkis 2004).

Sustainable development and triple bottom line ideas were originally defined in world economy context. Nevertheless, it is now used also in the context of business units, especially Supply Chains as the often operate on global scale and hence can have significant effect on societies, economies and eco-systems.

Sustainable supply chain is not only the trend recognized in research (in Web of Science Core collection there is over 1200 publications on “sustainable supply chain” indexed since 2000, the number of works published is dynamically increasing after 2010), but also practical approach promoted by organizations (i.e. SCF—Sustainable Supply Chain Foundation) and authorities.

4.5 Food Supply Chain Food supply chain management is developing as a research discipline spanning local, regional, national and international arenas and it has progressed from a series of shorter, independent transactions to more collaborative relationships between producers, processors, manufacturers and retailers (Bourlakis 2004).

Many key trends observable for supply chains are also evident in food supply chains, including mentioned in previous sections trend on sustainability but also implementation of information technology for supply chain coordination and management (Mondragon et al. 2020). Food supply chain is the area of interest important for academics, nevertheless it is an issue of great practical importance.

Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 315 4.6 Global Supply Chain The general trend recognized in the economy is globalization. It affects all areas of business activity (and does not limit to business activities, affecting science, education, leisure activities and entertainment).

Global Supply Chain can be simple defined as supply chain operating in global market, while Global Supply Chain Management is defined as the distribution of goods and services throughout a transnational companies’ global network to maximize profit and minimize waste (Bhatnagar 2012). The scale is crucial and determines the trend and size and scope of problems dealt with.

Since global supply-chain management is the general trend dealing with numerous specific problems, it is operationalized in six dimensions namely: logistics management, competitor orientation, customer orientation, supply-chain coordination, supply management, and operations management (Hult 2003). Due to general formulation of the trend its representation in literature is fuzzy as researchers tend to focus on specific problems.

4.7 Humanitarian Supply Chain Humanitarian supply chain is the flow of relief aid and the related information between the beneficiaries affected by disaster and the donors so as to minimize human suffering and death (Cozzolino et al. 2012).

Since there were 6,637 natural disasters between 1974 and 2003 worldwide, with more than 5.1 billion affected people, more than 182 million homeless, more than 2 million deaths, and with a reported damage of $1.38 trillion USD (Center for Research on the Epidemiology of the Disasters (CRED)) (Ergun et al. 2009) such solution becomes not only a trend but also the necessity.

In 2005 alone, over 180,000 deaths and $200 billion USD economic losses have occurred due to disasters according to the Disaster Resource Network Humanitarian Relief Initiative (HRI). The September 11 attacks (2001), tsunami in South Asia (2004), Hurricane Katrina (2005), earthquakes in Pakistan (2005) and Java (2006), COVID19 situation and many more till now make humanitarian aspect of supply more and more important.

4.8 Service Supply Chain World’s economy is facing the shift from economy based on manufacturing to economy based on services. And as goods move in supply chain structures so do the services coordinated with material flows, completing them and adding value to materials as they flow. Due to the nature of services, SCM in services is more complicated than in manufacturing.

Service Supply Chain can be defined as a network of suppliers, service providers, consumers and other supporting units that performs the function 316 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak of transaction of resources required to produce service followed by transformation of these resources into supporting and core services and finally delivery these services to customers (Baltacioglu et al. 2007).

Major elements of Service Supply Chain Management which differentiate it from manufacturing include bidirectional supply chains, perishability and simultaneous management of both capacity and demand (Shahin 2010). It has been pointed out that SSCM could provide considerable benefits to service organizations, including flexibility in delivery, dynamic scheduling and process orientation. The Service Supply Chain seems to be an interesting stressing the importance of logistics services.

4.9 Problems and Issues Identified in Literature on Supply Chains The list of problems and issues identified in literature on supply chain with systematic literature review includes 22 elements linked with clusters presented in the previous section. The problems listed are of a different nature and scope. However, they can be grouped according to their character and origin.

With such approach, the first group includes problems arising from and connected to supply chain’s operation, so the character of the problems is endogenous, while the second includes problems arising from interaction with environment or environment itself, so the character of problems is exogenous. One of the endogenous problems is supply chain structure, as it refers to number and types of enterprises involved in supply chain operation, as well as links created between them.

Supply chain structure can be referred to as supply chain network (Abdi et al. 2020). The definition of the structure and of the principles of its operation depends on many factors, including product design, technology, market etc., which makes it a complex decision. The process of definition of supply chain structure is supply chain design (Tirkolaee et al. 2020). Supply chain design results in developing general principles for supply chain constitution and operation.

The more elements in a supply chain, the more complex it is. Complexity of supply chain can be analyzed in two dimensions, namely the number of elements and the diversity of elements, both resulting in numerous challenges for supply chain management (Piya et al. 2019). Moreover, supply chain structure, design and complexity have a strong impact on supply chain performance and characteristics.

Considering the above mentioned, supply chain performance is also endogenous problem, greatly influenced by supply chain structure, complexity (Zhan and Tan 2020) and supply chain processes (Zimon et al. 2019). The problem of supply chain performance is of great complexity as it refers not only to performance of individual enterprises that cooperate within supply chain, but also to overall performance of the entire supply chain.

The latter approach requires considering numerous trade-offs and synergies within the structure and processes. Performance of the supply chains Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 317 is expected to improve with integration level. However, it can be compromised by supply chain complexity. Hence, supply chain integration is also an endogenous issue.

Integration is operationalized by the number and range of links between supply chain elements (enterprises) and is generally perceived as positive phenomena (Durach and Machuca 2018). Thanks to integration material and information flows in supply chains are faster, more efficient and economic. Moreover, research prove that supply chain integration mitigates Bullwhip effect (Zhang and Zhang 2020). The problem closely linked to supply chain integration and performance is supply chain coordination.

The coordination of actions means combined operation of the subjects, which: (1) is directed towards achievement of set, common, mutually compliant targets, (2) encompasses systematizing, ordering and approving process and various components of the system, (3) takes place in the agreed time and (4) exerts some influence on behavior of the cooperating entities (Grzybowska and Hoffa 2015). The problem of supply chain coordination was first modeled and analyzed in (Kumar 1992).

The problem is also of endogenous character as aims at improving supply chain performance by aligning the plans and the objectives of individual enterprises. Hence, it focuses on supply chain operation. Aligning of plans and objectives could lead to integration by inventory management and ordering decisions taken in distributed inter-company settings but striving for the same goal. Goal definition is the part of strategy.

Supply chain strategy is an endogenous problems as strategies are often resource-based and strive to exploit potential of business entities (von Falkenhausen et al. 2019). Strategy includes goals not only in ongoing perspective but also for the ones to be achieved in the future. According to some authors, strategy is mostly about planning for the future. Supply chain planning is another endogenous supply chain problem identified in the literature (Lejarza and Baldea 2019).

Supply chains case give lots of opportunities when strategy is concerned, as potential of supply chain cane be increased easier than potential of single business (by including new elements in the structure). Moreover, supply chains can benefit from shared resources and synergy resulting from integration and coordination of their structure. The resources considered include human, technical and financial ones.

Supply chain finances are the problem that should be interpreted on one hand as an advantage of complex structures, as potentially they have access to larger financial resources, on the other it could be disadvantage due to problems with money distribution (Jia et al. 2020). Undoubtedly, financial resources support goal realization when managed well. The goals most often mention in supply chain context are supply chain flexibility (Novais et al.

2019), supply chain agility (Shamout 2020), and supply chain resilience (Sawyerr and Harrison 2020). The supply chain should be characterized by durability, denoting the ability to resist rapid change and the ability to survive (Grzybowska and Hoffa-D˛abrowska 2017).

Many definitions of organizational flexibility may be found though it is commonly accepted that organizational flexibility stands for the organization’s capability to adopt to changes taking place in its environment (Buła and Bernard 2011). The definition of agility is quite similar, as the terms are sometimes confused. Agility can be defined as the capability of a company to rapidly change or adapt in response to 318 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak changes in the market.

When searching for differences, one of the most important is that flexibility is adaptive approach, while agility tends to be pro-active one. Considering resilience, it is defined as the ability of an organization to anticipate, prepare for, respond and adapt to incremental change and sudden disruptions in order to survive and prosper. Resilience is thus the ability of a system to return to its original or desired form after a disturbance has occurred (Konecka et al. 2018).

Organizational resilience is supposed to provide supply chain security on numerous levels, starting from security of the entire supply chain structure, through security of supply chain components and security of individual employees (Shamsi et al. 2019). All these goals included in plans are, as mentioned, supported by integration and coordination of supply chain. However, they can be compromized by diruptions in supply chain environment.

Supply chain disruption should be perceived as risk source and exogenous factor as it results from environment characteristics (Lawson et al. 2019). Contemporary market environment is often described as volatile, turbulent or even chaotic due to scope and pace of changes it undergoes. The changes make management difficult inreasing supply chain risk (Xu et al. 2020). Hence, implementation of well-known, recognized and established management methods inefficient or even impossible.

Hence the interest in the problem has both academic (as a challenge to existing knowledge on management) and practical (as a challenge to practitioners in their everyday activities) perspectives. The disruptions can be dealt with thanks to innovative approach to management. Supply chain innovation (Chen et al. 2020) is also the problem identified in systematic literature review which generally corresponds with the trends recognized in many areas, including industry (Industry 4.0 solutions).

Industry 4.0 focuses on nine technologies: autonomous robots, system integration, the Internet of Things (IoT), simulation, additive manufacturing, cloud computing, augmented reality, big data, and cybersecurity (Kaur et al. 2020).

The innovative solution from industry affect supply chains, yet logistics solutions, namely Logistics 4.0 concept, empowers contemporary supply chains equipping it with data necessary for making decisions and methods and tools supporting information and material flows, even in turbulent environment and dynamically changing conditions. Supply chain innovations are perceived as exogenous problems as they are usually produced by research institutes and/or academia and implemented to supply chains.

Thanks to real time communication that benefits from contemporary technology supply chain collaboration (Shou et al. 2020) can be increased via new forms of supply chain contract (Min et al. 2020), together with (21) supply chain relationships with environment (Davis et al. 2019) and (22) supply chain visibility (Cousins et al. 2019). These problems are also addressed by literature and recognized in hereby paper.

Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 319 5 Conclusion The factor that inspires academics, stimulates research and leads to generating new knowledge is undoubtedly the changeability of the economy. Both, enterprises and SCs must respond very quickly to the challenges and opportunities of the business world, adjusting their structure and processes to requirements of customers by introducing all kinds of innovations.

The base of knowledge related to supply chain research is dynamically expanding. The growing trend of publishing scientific papers on the subject is observable, which indicates that the supply chain concept is in the center of attention of scientists and researchers. Identification of these trends seems to be important from academic perspective, giving inspiration do scientists and research, as well as to business people.

Contemporary research stress the importance of advanced ICT solutions in supply chains, cyber-physical systems, intelligent and autonomous solutions. Considering continuous development of knowledge generated in the field, in-depth research to systematize and rationalize it is required.

Analysis of the process of knowledge development and its dynamics to reveal and characterize the evolution and identify potential development trends seems necessary from academic perspective, not only to organize the knowledge but also to identify future research potential. The research conducted allowed to identify not only contemporary trends in research on supply chains, but also problems dealt with.

It can be used as the basis for deepened research on relations and interactions between trends and problems identified. Acknowledgments Support for this research has been provided by 0812-SBAD-4170. References Abdi A, Abdi A, Akbarpour N (2020) Innovative approaches to design and address green supply chain network with simultaneous pick-up and split deliver.

J Cleaner Prod 250, In Press Ballouki I, Douimi M, Ouzizi L (2017) Decision support tool for supply chain configuration considering new product re-design: an agent-based approach. J Adv Manuf Syst 16(4):291–315 Baltacioglu T, Baltacioglu A, Kaplan E, Kaplan D, Oznur M, Oznur Y, Kaplan Y (2007) A new framework for service supply chains. Serv Indust J 27:105–124 Beamon BM (1999) Designing the green supply chain.

Logist Inform Manag 12(4):332–342 Bhatnagar K (2012) Customer-oriented global supply chains: concepts for effective management. Hershey, Pennsylvania, Information Science Reference Bourlakis W (2004) Food supply chains management. Blackwell, Oxford Buła P, Zi˛ebicki B (2011) Organizational flexibility as a challenge of contemporary management. Determinants and methods of measurement.

Acta Commercii 11:171–180 Chen Y, Duan L, Zhang W (2020) Effect of user involvement in supply chain cloud innovation: a game theoretical model and analysis. J Global Inform Manag 28(1):23–38 Colicchia C, Strozzi F (2012) Supply Chain risk management: a new methodology for a systematic literature review.

Supply Chain Manage: Int J 17(4):403–418 320 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak Cousins PD, Lawson B, Petersen KJ (2019) Investigating green supply chain management practices and performance The moderating roles of supply chain ecocentricity and traceability. Int J Oper Product Manag 39(5):767–786 Cozzolino A, Rossi S, Conforti A (2012) Agile and lean principles in the humanitarian supply chain: the case of the united nations world food programme.

J Humanitarian Logist Supply Chain Manag 2(1):16–33 Davis DF, Davis-Sramek B, Golicic SL (2019) Constrained choice in supply chain relationships: the effects of regulatory institutions. Int J Logist Manag 30(4):1101–1123 Durach CF, Machuca JAD (2018) A matter of perspective—the role of interpersonal relationships in supply chain risk management. Int J Oper Product Manag 38(10):1866–1887 Elkington J (2002) Cannibals with forks: the triple bottom line of 21st century business.

Capstone, Oxford Ergun O, Karakus G, Keskinocak P, Swann J, Villarreal M (2009) Humanitarian supply chain management – an overview. Models Algorithms Optim Logistics Frei R, Jack L, Krzyzaniak S (2020) Sustainable reverse supply chains and circular economy in multichannel retail returns, Business Strategy and the Environment, In Press Green K, Morton B, New S (1998) Green purchasing and supply policies: do they improve companies’ environmental performance?

Supply Chain Manag: Int J 3(2):89–95 Green BN, Johnson CD, Adams A (2006) Writing narrative literature reviews for peer-reviewed journals: secrets of the trade. J Chiropractic Med 5(3):101–117 Green KW Jr, Zelbst PJ, Meacham J, Bhadauria VS (2012) Green supply chain management practices: impact on performance. Supply Chain Manag: Int J 17(3):290–305 Grzybowska K (2012) Supply chain sustainability—analysing the enablers.

In: Golinska P, Romano CA (Eds), environmental issues in supply chain management—new trends and applications, Springer, 25–40 Grzybowska K, Hoffa P (2015) Approving with application of an electronic bulletin board, as a mechanism of coordination of actions in complex systems. In: Omatu S, Malluhi QM, Rodríguez Gonzalez S, Bocewicz G, Bucciarelli E, Giulioni G, Iqba F (Eds.

), Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence, 12th International Conference Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 373, 357–365 Grzybowska K, Hoffa-D˛abrowska P (2017) Analysis of the survival of complex systems with an actions coordination mechanism, In: Bajo J et al (eds) Highlights of Practical Applications of Cyber-Physical Multi-Agent Systems.

Communications in Computer and Information Science, Springer International Publishing, 722, 197–208 Guide VDR, Jayaraman V, Linton JD (2003) Building contingency planning for closed-loop supply chains with product recovery.

J Oper Manag 21:259–279 Hoffa-D˛abrowska P, Grzybowska K, JPE, de Souza (2020) Sustainable Supply Chain: a content analysis based on published case studies, in press Hernández JE, Lyons AC, Poler R, Mula J, Goncalves R (2014) A reference architecture for the collaborative planning modelling process in multi-tier Supply Chain networks: a Zachman-based approach.

Product Plann Control 25(13–14):1118–1134 Hosseini-Motlagh S, Ebrahimi S, Zirakpourdehkordi R (2020) Coordination of dual-function acquisition price and corporate social responsibility in a sustainable closed-loop supply chain. J Cleaner Product 251, In Press Hult GTM (2003) An integration of thoughts on knowledge management. Decis Sci 34(2):189 Jia F, Zhang T, Chen L (2020) Sustainable supply chain Finance: Towards a research agenda.

J Cleaner Product 243, In Press Kaur R, Awasthi A, Grzybowska K (2020) Evaluation of key skills supporting industry 4.0—a review of literature and practice. In Grzybowska K, Awasthi A, Sawhney R (eds), Sustainable logistics and production in industry 4.0, EcoProduction (Environmental Issues in Logistics and Manufacturing).

Springer, Cham, 19–29 Classification of Trends and Supply Chains Development Directions 321 Konecka S, Łupicka A, Grzybowska K (2018) Disruptions in supply chains with special reference to road transport processes. Innovation Management and Education Excellence Through Vision 2020, I–XI, 3841–3849 Kumar A (1992) Supply contracts and manufacturing decisions.

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, Graduate School of Industrial Administration, p 15213 Lawson B, Potter A, Pil FK (2019) Supply chain disruptions: the influence of industry and geography on firm reaction speed. Int J Oper Product Manag 39(9/10):1076–1098 Lejarza F, Baldea M (2019) Closed-loop optimal operational planning of supply chains with fast product quality dynamics.

Comput Chem Eng 132, In Press Lv Q (2017) Supply Chain coordination game model based on inventory information sharing. J Interdisciplinary Math 20(1):35–46 Mardani A, Kannan D, Hooker RE (2020) Evaluation of green and sustainable supply chain management using structural equation modelling: a systematic review of the state of the art literature and recommendations for future research.

J Cleaner Product 249, In Press Mentzer JT, DeWitt W, Keebler JS, Min S, Nix NW, Smith CD, Zacharia ZG (2001) Defining supply chain management. J Busin Logist 22(2):1–25 Min J, Zhou YW, Zhao J (2010) An inventory model for deteriorating items under stock-dependent demand and two-level trade credit. Appl Math Model 34(11):3273–3285 Nagurney A (2006) Supply chain network economics: dynamics of prices, flows and profits.

Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, England Novais L, Maqueira JM, Ortiz-Bas A (2019) A systematic literature review of cloud computing use in supply chain integration. Comput Ind Eng 129:296–314 Piya S, Shamsuzzoha A, Khadem M (2020) An approach for analysing supply chain complexity drivers through interpretive structural modelling. Int J Logistics Res Appl 23(4):311–336 Rogers DS, Tibben-Lembke R (2001) An examination of reverse logistics practices.

J Bus Logistics 22(2):129–148 Sawyerr E, Harrison C (2020) Developing resilient supply chains: lessons from high-reliability organisations. Supply Chain Manage: Int J 25(1):77–100 Shahin A (2010) SSCM: service supply chain management. Int J Logistics Syst Manage 6(1):60–75 Shamsi J, Urban AS, Imran M, Trizio LD, Manna L (2019) Metal halide perovskite nanocrystals: synthesis, post-synthesis modifications, and their optical properties.

Chem Rev 119:3296 Stock JR (1992) Reverse logistics, Oak Brook, IL: Council of Logistics Management Stock JR (1998) Development and implementation of reverse logistics programs. In: annual conference proceedings, Oak Brook, IL: Council of Logistics Management, 579–586 Strozzi F, Colicchia C, Creazza A, Noè C (2017) Literature review on the “Smart Factory” concept using bibliometric tools.

Int J Prod Res 55(22):6572–6591 Surana A, Kumara S, Greaves M, Raghavan UN (2005) Supply-chain networks: a complex adaptive systems perspective. Int J Prod Res 43:20:4235–4265 Tirkolaee EB, Mardani A, Dashtian Z, Soltani M, Weber GW (2020) A novel hybrid method using fuzzy decision making and multi-objective programming for sustainable-reliable supplier selection in two-echelon supply chain design.

J Clean Prod 250:119517 von Falkenhausen, Fleischmann M, Bode C (2019) How to find the right supply chain strategy? An analysis of contingency variables. Decis Sci 504:726–755 Xu S, Zhang X, Feng L, Yang W (2020) Disruption risks in supply chain management: a literature review based on bibliometric analysis. Int J Prod Res https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020. 1717011 Zhan Y, Tan KH (2020) An analytic infrastructure for harvesting big data to enhance supply chain performance.

Eur J Operat Res Zhang S, Zhang M (2020) Mitigation of bullwhip effect in closed-loop supply chain based on fuzzy robust control approach. Complexity, 1085870 Zhu Q, Sarkis J (2004) Relationships between operational practices and performance among early adopters of green supply chain management practices in Chinese manufacturing enterprises.

J Oper Manage 22:265–289 322 K. Grzybowska and A. Stachowiak Zimon D, Tyan J, Sroufe R (2019) Implementing sustainable supply chain management: reactive, cooperative, and dynamic models.

Sustain 11:7227 Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions—Causal Loop Dynamics of Relations Between Academia and Business Agnieszka Stachowiak, Joanna Oleśków-Szłapka, Przemysław Niewiadomski, and Natalia Pawlak Abstract The changes in contemporary economy are widely recognized and dealt with advanced tools and methods supporting companies facing dynamics and competitiveness of market environment.

The list of tools and methods is long and usually they are jointly referred to as Industry 4.0. The general idea of Industry 4.0 is to benefit from contemporary technologies to increase efficiency and competitiveness of company, however, when referring specifically to material and information flows the Logistics 4.0 term is used.

Logistics 4.0 concepts benefits from advanced communication protocols, cooperation between humans and machines, which requires knowledge and skills that are provided by higher education institutions. According to authors, knowledge gap filling is a dynamic phenomenon that can be interpreted and analysed with system dynamics approach. The dynamics of knowledge gap filling could be described as goal-seeking dynamics.

The loop dynamics shows that when considering the expectations and taking corrective actions, the knowledge gap can be easily filled in a given time period. The goal of the chapter is to present the original model of dissemination and absorption of Logistics 4.0 solutions developed based on literature review and authors’ experience.

Keywords Logistics 4.0 · Knowledge absorption · Causalloops A. Stachowiak (B) · J. Oleśków-Szłapka · N. Pawlak Poznan University of Technology, J. Rychlewskiego 2, 60-965 Poznan, Poland e-mail: agnieszka.stachowiak@put.poznan.pl J. Oleśków-Szłapka e-mail: joanna.oleskow-szlapka@put.poznan.pl N. Pawlak e-mail: natalia.pawlak@put.poznan.pl P. Niewiadomski University of Zielona Gora, Gora, Poland e-mail: pniewiadomski@uz.zgora.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_22 323 324 A. Stachowiak et al. 1 Introduction As the world and economy changes, so change the needs and requirements on knowledge and skills of workers.

Knowledge and skills of workers have to be consistent with the content of work and since the content changes continuously, workers have the solid background within their specialization but also ability to adapt and learn. Flexibility is a personal feature, which can be practiced and developed while solid knowledge background needs to be provided by education institution.

Nevertheless, taking into account the operation mode of education system the process of educating and knowledge gap closing or minimizing is disturbed by delays: in identification of divergences, as they are recognized after the students graduate, hence the feedback opportunities are limited. Moreover, there are some delays connected with designing and then implementing corrective actions. Thus, the gap filling dynamics is more likely to be recognized as oscillatory dynamics.

The delays result in increased difficulties, time and money consumption in knowledge gap filling process. To deal with them, identification of knowledge needs and corrective actions design and implementation need to be the processes carried on not only regular bases but also concurrent to providing education. Knowledge requirement in contemporary economy is determined by processes realized and technologies implemented.

The list of technologies, tools and methods that contemporary companies benefit from includes Internet of Things, cloud computing, Big Data processing an many more. These technologies are referred to (among others) as pillars of Industry 4.0 (Rüßmann 2015). The general idea of Industry 4.0 is to benefit from contemporary technologies to increase efficiency and competitiveness of company.

Since implementation of production processes is dependent on logistics, feeding production and delivering final products to customers, contemporary solutions for logistics required. Hence, when referring specifically to material and information flows the Logistics 4.0 term is used. Logistics 4.0 concepts benefits from advanced communication protocols, cooperation between humans and machines, which makes it demanding in terms of knowledge.

The following paper aims to introduce original model on knowledge on Logistics 4.0 absorption based on causal loops dynamics. The chapter is structured as follows: after introduction, the terms and definitions of Logistics 4.0 are introduced in Theoretical background section, research methodology, including knowledge absorption idea and causal loops dynamics is explained in Material and method section, the original model is presented and discussed in Model introduction section.

The final section is Summary.

2 Theoretical Background According to the Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals (previously the Council of Logistics Management), logistics is the process of planning, implementing and controlling procedures for the efficient and effective transportation and storage of Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 325 goods including services and related information from the point of origin to the point of consumption for the purpose of conforming to customer requirements and includes inbound, outbound, internal and external movement.

Since the definition is quite general, it is not challenged. However, considering characteristics of contemporary market, change of methods and tools than logistics benefits from seems unavoidable due to contemporary material and information flows’ complexity.

Globalization is recognized as the determinant of most of the changes in the contemporary economy, and one of its consequences is development of a global supply chain as a solution enabling companies and customers benefiting from global market. The Logistics Trend Radar report, developed by the DHL Company in 2014, was one of the first publications that linked Industry 4.0 with logistics.

It drew attention to the benefits emerging from using modern technologies within the field of Industry 4.0 as part of the provision of logistic services. Since production is closely linked to Logistics through material and information flows feeding the processes, the paradigm shift caused by Industry 4.0 brought about a fundamental change in the entire logistics delivery process, shifting it towards service-oriented logistics on demand (Bubner 2014).

According to the report, the Internet of Things will support the introduction of intelligent machinery and devices that enable the control of modern logistics processes to the logistics market (Bubner 2014), contributing to development of Logistics 4.0 idea. More recent work on logistics’ (especially inboud/internal logistics’) role is presented in (Kostrzewski et al. 2020).

Logistics 4.0 is defined as “A strategic technological direction that integrates different types of technologies to increase both the efficiency and effectiveness of the supply chain, shifting the focus of the organizations to value chains, maximizing the value delivered to the consumers as well as the customers by raising the levels of competitiveness. In literature on Industry 4.0, the term used to refer to Logistics processes performed at excellent level is Smart Logistics (Barreto et al.

2017). Smart Logistic is defined as the „logistics system, which can improve the flexibility, the adaptation to the market changes and bring the company closer to customer needs” (Strandhagen et al. 2017).

Disregarding small terminological differences between Smart Logistics and Logistics 4.0, they both are designed to support individualized and technologically advanced production processes performer at the global scale with corresponding (in terms of complexity and technological level) logistics processes (Szymańska et al. 2017). This is achieved by increasing the levels of transparency and decentralization among different parties through digitalization” (Amr et al. 2019).

Hence, the definition of Logistics 4.0 combines two aspects: processual (supply chain processes are a subject of the Logistics 4.0 actions) and technical (tools and technologies that support internal processes in the supply chains) (Szymańska et al. 2017). The tools and technologies are mostly within IT range as digitization creates plenty of advantages for the supply chain.

Considering scope and intensity of logistics operation in global markets, where companies manage millions of daily shipments, large amounts of data is obtained via orders transcripts, smart low battery consuming sensors, GPS, RFID tags, weather forecasts or even social media. These solutions are usually associated with transport processes. Warehousing processes can also benefit from 326 A. Stachowiak et al.

advanced technical solutions thanks to improvement by combining automation, the Internet of things, drones, 3D printing and innovative applications, becoming smarter, more connected, automated and robotized. The list of existing solutions that support Logistics 4.0 includes the technologies: internet of things, cyber-physical systems, Big Data, cloud computing, mobile-based systems, social media-based systems and further technologies (Winkelhaus and Grosse 2019).

The expected benefits include access to data and ability to process them, which not only improves logistics services provided, but also consequently results in increased customer service level. Moreover, companies reduced complexity, increased reliability, predictability and thus minimized risks, reduced errors, reduced transport cost, creating new business areas and thus turnover potential, increased innovation capability, increased agility and flexibility, e.g.

in case of new market requirements (Strandhagen et al. 2017). As a result, Logistics 4.0 plays the same role in managing supply chains as Industry 4.0 for modern manufacturing factories. However, to benefit from Logistics 4.0 companies need to adjust their operations and management to requirements of contemporary technologies by improving their flexibility and openness through (Heistermann et al.

2018): – decentral self-organization through ad hoc interconnection; – virtual ad hoc organizations, value added chains; – autonomous self-organizing logistics and production entities; – expansion through “up-numbering” (modularization); – flexible deployment of employees (availability calendars, specialist knowledge catalogue).

Meeting the requirements listed requires deepened knowledge in management, while implementing technical solutions associated with Logistics 4.0 requires technical, IT and engineering knowledge. 3 Materials and Methods The methodology implemented to develop the model of dissemination and absorption of Logistics 4.0 solutions is based on two pillars: knowledge absorption phenomena and causal loops dynamics.

Knowledge is an extremely important resource at many levels: economy/society (knowledge contributes to well-being of societies by developing innovations), organizations (organizational knowledge contributes to creating competitive advantage) and individual (personal knowledge increases potential of a person, opens professional opportunities and contributes to higher level of well-being).

The process of knowledge absorption is consisting of a number of different sub-processes, such as recognizing the value of external knowledge, acquiring external knowledge, transforming or assimilating it, and exploiting external knowledge (Zerwas 2014). Considering the complexity of the term, many theoreticians in this area structure absorptive capacity dividing it into dimensions and components (Burcharth et al.

2015) Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 327 where dimensions include acquisition, assimilation, transformation and exploitation of knowledge (Zerwas 2014), as listed and defined below (Ferreras-Méndez et al. 2015): • Ability to acquire knowledge (Aac): understood as the ability to locate and identify sources, and also its valuation and acquisition as a basis for operational activities.

• Ability to assimilate knowledge (Aas): understood as the ability to assimilate it, consisting of ordering, correct analysis, interpretation, and understanding. • Ability to transform knowledge (Atr): understood as the ability to combine new knowledge with knowledge already possessed, through adding or eliminating specific components of knowledge or by interpreting knowledge in a new innovative way.

• Ability to use knowledge (Aus): understood as the ability to incorporate knowledge into operational activities and improve processes and competences. Based on the structure of the concept, knowledge absorption requires an active approach, openness to interaction with business and scientific environments, and knowledge flows and diffusion within the company itself. Moreover, the findings from the study by Ferreras-Méndez et al. (2015, Kostopoulos et al.

(2011) show that firms’ involvement in innovation collaborations with various external parties enriches their knowledge base (Gebauer et al. 2012) and develops a better ability to assimilate and exploit external knowledge (Camison and Fores 2010) to facilitate the understanding of new concepts and effectively implement innovation (Pai and Chang 2013). Knowledge absorption is intensified thanks to knowledge diffusion.

Knowledge diffusion is the responsibility of educators at all the levels of educational system, starting from primary level, through secondary and vocation education, to professional and academic level as well (Biesta 2006). To describe mechanism of knowledge diffusion and absorption, causal loops dynamics is implemented. Since knowledge absorption is a process, implementing dynamic analysis based on causal seems to be appropriate. Causal loops visualize interrelations between variables in systems.

Thanks to visualization, understanding the situation and consequences of changes of variables is easier. Causal loop diagram consist of nodes representing variables, and links representing connections and relations (Sterman 2000). The links can be marked (S) for positive relations meaning that changes in variables go in the same direction or (o) for negative relations, meaning that changes in variables go in opposite directions.

The changes in variables tend to be cyclical—causal diagrams take the form of loops. The loops can be reinforcing (R) or balancing (B). The nature of the loop is based on the feedback it is based on (Lopez-Caamal et al. 2014).

Positive feedback is a process that occurs in a feedback loop which exacerbates the effects of a small disturbance, which means that the effects of a perturbation on a system include an increase in the magnitude of the perturbation, while negative feedback occurs when some function of the output of a system, process, or mechanism is fed back in a manner that tends to reduce the fluctuations in the output, whether caused by changes in the input or by other disturbances (Ford 2010).

Hence, considering the 328 A. Stachowiak et al. nature of the feedback, the reinforcing loop is a cycle in which the effect of a variation in any variable propagates through the loop and returns to the variable reinforcing the initial deviation. A balancing loop is the cycle in which the effect of a variation in any variable propagates through the loop and returns to the variable a deviation opposite to the initial one (Sterman 2000).

4 Research Background The first phenomenon referred to in the research is knowledge diffusion. Knowledge on Logistics 4.0 dissemination is performed mostly at academic level as the term and solution is relatively new. Growing number of publications on the subject proves researchers’ interest in Logistics 4.0 and Smart Logistics. The trend is presented in Fig. 1. Knowledge is also disseminated by providing educational services.

In the scope of logistics, they are offered at vocational level, by HEIs at first cycle courses and second cycle (MSc), as well as on numerous courses and training sessions. The second phenomenon into consideration is knowledge absorption. For the research purposes, knowledge absorption was analysed at organizational and individual level. Considering companies, Polish companies were analysed. The research was on how they absorb knowledge on Logistics 4.0 by implementing solutions it encompasses.

It relies on secondary sources of data from Smart Industry reports, statistical data and literature analysis. Fundamental sources of data are Smart Industry reports commissioned by the Ministry of Development and Siemens: editions from 2016, 2017 and 2018. Report from 2016 comprises companies employing 250 people a b Fig.

1 Number of publications on a “Logistics 4.0” topic and b “Smart Logistics” topics (Source own elaboration work based on WOS data: February 2020) Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 329 AutomaƟzaƟon of producƟon (single… 049% 010% 024% Mobile technologies 031% 007% 036% AutomaƟzaƟon of producƟon… 027% 009% 038% RoboƟzaƟon of producƟon lines 014% 004% 062% Internet of things 013%003% 065% Big data 012%003% 61% Cloud compuƟng 011% 007% 57% 3D prinƟng 008% 002% 066% Micro and nanoelectronics,… 008% 003% 073% use actually plan use within year do not use at all Fig.

2 Technologies that use SMEs in Poland (Source own elaboration work based on Smart Industry Report 2017) and more, while report 2017 and 2018 were conducted on a sample of enterprises from micro, small and medium groups employing no more than 250 people. The sample from 2018 includes micro, small and medium enterprises in the following sizes: N = 60 micro companies (1–9 employees); N = 90—small companies (10– 49 employees); N = 50—medium companies (50–250 employees).

According to the study, “Smart Industry Poland 2018” Smart Industry is based on three pillars (Siemens 2018): – digitizing information that allows to create a more effective value chain and more efficiently manage production processes at all levels, – flexible and intelligent production technologies, – modern communication using the technologies and capabilities of contemporary networks between market participants, systems and end users. The pillars refer to manufacturing but also to logistics.

The diagnosis of the innovativeness of the Polish economy allows to state that the Polish industry (with few exceptions) is in fact at the third stage of development, which is even before the Smart Industry stage. Polish industrial companies associate smart production most of all with operational efficiency perceived from many different perspectives. Such an approach can be found in the conclusions presented in Siemens’s Smart Industry reports.

The most common answers to the question on how the respondents understand the concept under analysis focused on (Siemens 2018): – efficiency in terms of production management, including the use of smart equipment and new technologies, – production cost optimization possibilities, – flexible response to customers’ needs, with processes optimized in accordance with the customers’ orders, – modern communication that also includes sharing information directly with product consumers.

330 A. Stachowiak et al. The study conducted by Siemens and Millward Brown on Smart Industry in 2016 (Siemens 2016) showed that only 25% representatives of Polish production companies were familiar with the concept of Smart Industry. At the same time, a significantly higher number of people declared that their organizations used technologies and solutions characteristic for smart factories.

Elements of Smart Industry used and planned for implementation within surveyed companies comprised solutions (also referring to logistics): – for the digitization of information enabling optimal and effective production management at all its levels—73.2% – aimed at improving communication with the use of modern technologies and networks inside and outside the company—66% – enabling the use of flexible and intelligent technologies in production, which can be influenced on a regular basis and quickly respond to the changing expectations of target recipients—58.8%.

According to Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) Poland has been included in the efficiency economies with the aspirations to join the group of innovationoriented countries in recent years. The results of the survey show that the technologies that give the greatest competitive advantage are the automation and robotization of production.

The most commonly used solution currently supporting innovativeness is automation with the use of individual machines—in 48.6% of companies have already been implemented, and 10.4% of enterprises have plans for the next year. In turn, the robotization of the entire production line already was implemented in 14.3%, and implementation is planned in 3.6% of companies (see Fig. 3.). Smart Industry 2018 Report concludes that 60% of entrepreneurs have not heard of the Industry 4.0 concept.

However, this is not synonymous with the non-use of 52% 51% 32% 29% 25% 19% 15% 15% 13% 10% 9% 5% Data analysis 3D prinƟng soŌware that AutomaƟzaƟon reduces the of producƟon cost of lines prototyping and the introducƟon of new products Big data RoboƟzaƟon of producƟon lines Cloud compuƟng Internet of things CollaboraƟve robots Industrial internet of things Digital twins of digiƟzaƟon of producƟon ArƟficial intelligence Fig.

3 Quantity of SMEs in Poland that use Smart Industry Technologies (Source own elaboration work based on Smart Industry 2018 report Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 331 modern technologies by these companies. It has already been proved by findings from previous reports 2016 and 2017 (Siemens 2017).

The most important barriers limiting the adaptation of technology are related to the lack of financial resources for such activity (almost 65% of responses), lack of time (62%) and lack of qualified staff (53%). Among external factors decelerating the innovation process with the use of technological solutions, the respondents indicated bureaucracy (over 78% of answers), difficulties in acquiring competent employees (71.5%) and lack of support from public authorities (71%).

Automation of production lines (52% of indications), data analysis (51%) and software supporting the reduction of prototyping costs of new products (32%) are the most frequently used technologies by SMEs (see Fig. 2). At the same time, these are also technologies (including also robotization of production lines used by 25% of respondents) with the greatest impact on building competitive advantages and profits of the surveyed enterprises.

The survey Smart Industry 2018 was conducted on a nationwide sample of 200 companies from the industrial or production sector with the number of employees up to 249 employees, conducting production activity in Poland, i.e. having a production plant or plants operating in Poland. The analysis of the results takes into account the specificity of the heavy and light industry sector.

The least popular solution used in business practice is currently artificial intelligence, which was indicated only by 5% of respondents. At the same time, the relative low percentage of responses to Big Data and Cloud Computing solutions is puzzling.

Automatization of production lines, data analysis, software reducing cost of prototyping, robotization of production lines, Industrial Internet of things, collaborating robots, cloud computing and big data are use in practice in majority by medium sized companies. Whereas Internet of things and Artificial intelligence is used by medium and small enterprises in a similar range.

Mainly micro companies use onecomponent-3D printing and more than 26% micro companies indicated that use this tool in the practice. SMEs assessed within survey considered Artificial Intelligence the most difficult to implement (45% of surveyed companies). Hence, it can be stated that companies are striving for new solutions implementation, and consequently knowledge absorption. Knowledge absorption on individual level was also briefly characterized based on secondary data.

According to research by Polish Ministry of Entrepreneurship and Siemens (Siemens 2019) over 50% of engineers, working in industry think that educational offer is not well adjusted to requirements of innovative industry (see Fig. 4.). They lack knowledge and understand that the knowledge they need was not provided to them during educational processes. The observation is recognized by academics and result in research initiatives undertaken to adjust the offer to requirements.

The example of these initiatives are, among other University of the Future project (https://universitiesofthefuture.eu) and IE3: Industrial Engineering and Management of European Higher Education (https:// ie3.eu/the-project/). The conclusion arising from the background research is the following: knowledge on Logistics 4.0 is disseminated and absorbed in the economy; however, the processes are not as efficient as they could be. The authors believe that it 332 A. Stachowiak et al. Fig.

4 Managers’ perception of adjustment of educational offer to requirements of innovative industry (Source own elaboration work based on Smart Industry Report, 2019) is caused by delays in both processes, dissemination and validation. The mechanism is to be illustrated by the original model to be presented in the next section.

5 Model Assumptions As discussed above, individuals and companies challenged by a lack of knowledge resources, which is especially important because knowledge is a prerequisite for innovation and firms can generate long-term competitive advantages through innovation (Zerwas 2014). The stakeholders involved directly in knowledge dissemination and absorption are characterized in the Table 1.

As it is presented in the Table 1, the task of developing innovations is performer by both, academia and business, since academia can support companies when developing innovations with scientific expertise. There are programs (by local authorities, governments, UE etc.) financing such, cooperation and it can also take the form of industrial projects founded by companies themselves.

The lack of knowledge on Logistics 4.0 perceived at companies and individual level is being eliminated by educational offer of the system (including academia).

Table 1 Stakeholders of knowledge diffusion and absorption process Stakeholder Characteristics Tasks Companies Industrial companies, implementing innovation, striving to increase their competitiveness, adjusting to market requirements Searching for innovation, implementing innovations, developing solutions (innovations) Academia HEI and research centres generating knowledge Conducting research on advanced solutions, developing innovations, providing educational offer for students, teaching (Source own elaboration) Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 333 Knowledge, skills ACADEMIA INDUSTRY Tasks, expectations Fig.

5 Direct knowledge gap filling (Source own elaboration) ACADEMIA INDUSTRY knowledge, skills Tasks, expectations ALUMNI Fig. 6 Indirect knowledge gap filling (Source own elaboration) The knowledge gap can be filled in directly or indirectly, as presented in the Figs. 5 and 6 respectively. The direct knowledge gap filling is driven by requirements of companies needing knowledge and innovation implementation.

It includes industrial projects and expertise by universities and its nature is determined by clear and comprehensive identification of needs. In this case, companies willing to implement or develop innovative solutions cooperate with academia on market basis, feeding it with data necessary to develop a solution. Product of such cooperation is customized to specific needs and requirements of companies. If the gap between expectations and products is recognized, it is immediately filled in.

Knowledge flow is initiated by specified need; hence, it is pulled from both academia and industry. The indirect knowledge gap filling is through the University alumni, equipped with knowledge and working for industry. The alumni are the intermediary with accumulated knowledge they were provided with and they are supposed to use in their work. The nature of the phenomena is more complex. Students during their courses are taught and trained; knowledge flow is pushed by academia.

The expectations of industry and tasks to be performed are communicated to alumni/employees and this is the moment when the gap is recognized. Recognized gap needs to be filled in and usually it is done by internal training, mentoring and courses by companies or self-learning by alumni/employees. The dimensions of the gap are to be the subject of the further research, followed by defining and providing tools to fill in the gap.

According to authors, knowledge gap filling is a dynamic phenomenon that can be interpreted and analysed with system 334 A. Stachowiak et al. Industryexpe ctations divergencies expectations knowledge HEIsoffer Correctiveactions time Fig. 7 Dynamics of gap filling: goal-seeking dynamic (Source own elaboration) dynamics approach. The dynamics of knowledge gap filling could be presented with the model depicted in Fig. 7. The loop dynamics is based on archetypes of system behaviour.

The archetype was selected basing on the analysis of phenomena. The model shows that when considering the expectations and taking corrective actions, the knowledge gap can be easily filled in a given time period. Nevertheless, taking into account the operation mode of education system the process of knowledge gap closing or minimizing is disturbed by delays: in identification of divergences, as they are recognized after the students graduate, hence the feedback opportunities are limited.

Moreover, there are some delays connected with designing and then implementing corrective actions. Thus, the Fig. 8 more likely reflects the gap filling dynamics. The delays make the knowledge gap filling more difficult, and time- and costconsuming. To deal with them, identification of knowledge needs and corrective HEIsoffer Industryexp ectations DELAY divergencies DELAY knowle dge DELAY expectations Correctiveactions time Fig.

8 Dynamics of gap filling: oscillatory dynamics (Source own elaboration) Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 335 actions design and implementation need to be the processes carriedon not only regular bases but also concurrent to providing education. 6 Conclusions Contemporary economy generates numerous challenges for companies.

Customers’ requirements are changing immanently and these changes on one-hand follow technological changes, on the other induce them. The range and scope of changes in technology and management results in developing many methods and tools of different character but grouped under a flag of Industry 4.0.

The general idea of Industry 4.0 is to benefit from implementation of contemporary technologies to improve efficiency and competitiveness, however, when referring specifically to material and information flows the Logistics 4.0 term is used. Logistics 4.0 concepts benefits from advanced communication protocols, cooperation between humans and machines, which requires knowledge and skills that are provided by higher education institutions.

According to authors, knowledge gap filling is a dynamic phenomenon that can be interpreted and analysed with system dynamics approach. The dynamics of knowledge gap filling could be described as goal-seeking dynamics. The loop dynamics shows that when considering the expectations and taking corrective actions, the knowledge gap can be easily filled in a given time period.

The goal of the paper is to present the original model of dissemination and absorption of Logistics 4.0 solutions developed based on literature review and authors’ experience. The model presented shows the mechanism of knowledge diffusion and absorption. It show the mechanisms of processes and stresses the delays role. The greater the delay, the greater consequences—gaps in knowledge acquired and produced (disseminated). Knowing the mechanisms of the phenomenon enables it management.

All the stakeholders involved namely academia, industry, alumni and student can potentially benefit from the research results: a. Academia by understanding the importance of adjusting its educational offer to needs and requirements of contemporary industry, which will make its educational offer more attractive to students and future students and as results will improve its competitive position. b.

Industry by understanding the importance of acquiring employees equipped with relevant knowledge, which will probably contribute to developing and implementing high quality organizational solutions and innovations, increasing performance and competitiveness of companies. c. Alumni by understanding the importance of knowledge, which is making them attractive for future employers and ready for job market challenges.

d. Students by stimulating their need for knowledge, as they will see it is useful and in-line with business and industrial practices. 336 A. Stachowiak et al. Further research is in progress. It encompasses simulation experiments on system behaviour to identify the most important parameters of diffusion and absorption process, as well as critical sizes of delays and their influence on the size of the gaps.

References Barreto L, Amaral A, Pereira T (2017) Industry 4.0 implications in logistics: an overview. Proceedia Manuf 13:1245–1252 Biesta G (2006) What’s the point of lifelong learning if lifelong learning has no point? on the democratic deficit of policies for lifelong learning. Eur Educat Res J 5(3–4):169–180 Bubner NN, Bubner R,Helbig MJ (2014) Logistics trend radar, delivering insight today. Creating value tomorrow!, Pub.

DHL Customer Solutions & Innovation, Troisdorf Burcharth ALLA, Lettl C, Ulhøi JP (2015) Extending organizational antecedents of absorptive capacity: organizational characteristics that encourage experimentation. Technol Forecast Soc Change 90:269–284 Camison C, Fores B (2010) Knowledge absorptive capacity: New insights for its conceptualization and measurement.

J Bus Res 63:707715 Ezzat AM, Kassem S (2019) Logistics 4.0: definition and historical background, novel intelligent and leading emerging sciences conference (NILES), Giza, Egypt, 2019, pp 46–49 Ferreras-Méndez JL, Newell S, Fernández-Mesa A, Alegre J (2015) Depth and breadth of external knowledge search and performance: The mediating role of absorptive capacity. Indust Market Manag 47:86–97 Ford A (2010) Modeling the environment.

Island Press Gebauer H, Worch H, Truffer B (2012) Absorptive Capacity, learning processes and combinative capabilities as determinants of strategic innovation. Eur Manag J 30:57–73 Heistermann F, van Hompel M, Mallée T (2018) Digitisation in logistics, BVL International www. bvl.de/en Kostopoulos K, Papalexandris A, Papachroni M, Ioannou G (2011) Absorptive capacity, innovation, and financial performance.

J Bus Res 64:1335–1343 Kostrzewski M, Varjan P, Gnap J (2020) Solutions dedicated to internal logistics 4.0. In: Grzybowska K, Awasthi A, Sawhney R (eds) Sustainable logistics and production in Industry 4.0. EcoProduction (Environmental Issues in Logistics and Manufacturing). Springer, Cham Lopez-Caamal F, Middleton HR, Huber H (2014) Equilibria and stability of a class of positive feedback loops.

J Mathemat Biol 68(3):609–645 Pai F-Y, Chang H-F (2013) The effects of knowledge sharing and absorption on organizational innovation performance—a dynamic capabilities perspective. Interdiscip J Inform Knowl Manag 8:83–97 Rüßmann M et al (2015) Industry 4.0: the future of productivity and growth in manufacturing industries.

Boston Consulting Group (BCG), 1–14 Siemens, Raport Smart Industry Polska 2016, https://publikacje.siemens-info.com/pdf/123/Rap ort%20Smart%20Industry%20Polska%202016.pdf Siemens, Raport Smart Industry Polska 2017, https://publikacje.siemens-info.com/webreader/ 00131-000758-raport-smart-industry-polska-2017/index.html Siemens, Raport Smart Industry Polska 2018, https://publikacje.siemen-s-info.com/webreader/ 00175-001613-raport-smart-industry-polska-2018/index.html Siemens, Raport Smart Industry Polska 2019, https://publikacje.siemens-info.com/pdf/594/Rap ort%20Smart%20Industry%20Polska%202019.pdf Sterman JD (2000) Business dynamics: systems thinking and modeling for a complex world.

McGraw Hill/Irwin Framework of the Model of Dissemination and Absorption of Logistics 4.0 Solutions … 337 Strandhagen JO, Vallandingham LR, Fragapane G et al (2017) Logistics 4.0 and emerging sustainable business models. Adv Manuf 5:359 Szymańska O, Cyplik P, Adamczak M (2017) Logistics 4.0 A new paradigm or a set of solutions.

Res Logist Product 7(4):299–310, Poznan University of Technology Publishing House, Poznan Winkelhaus S, Grosse EH (2019) Logistics 4.0: a systematic review towards a new logistics system. Int J Product Res 58(1):18–43 Zerwas D (2014) The impact, meaning and challenges of knowledge absorption. In: Organizational Culture and Absorptive Capacity.

Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden The Supply Planning in the Distribution Network Using the Dynamic Programming Concept Fertsch Marek Abstract The chapter presents concept of method of supply planning in the distribution network using the dynamic programming. The main goal of the chapter is to present the results of the preliminary phase of research on supply planning methods in the distribution networks.

The method presented in the chapter uses the dynamic programming for purpose of supply planning in the distribution network. A distribution network structure model has been developed. Algorithm for supply planning has also been developed. The chapter ends with a presentation of a plan for further research.

Keywords Distribution network · Supply planning · Dynamic programming 1 Introduction Supply planning in distribution networks is based on two methods: the first is the so-called “traditional” method of operating a market. The second is the method of distribution requirement planning (DRP I). The basis of the traditional method of operation of the market is supply planning, which assumes an evenly distribution of supply in the planning horizon at a constant delivery cycle.

The size of supply for a given assortment item is determined on the basis of the maximum inventory norm, actual inventory, determined at the time of supply planning and the sales forecast to the next delivery. The described planning method works well in conditions of continuity and stability of demand. It is usually used in a situation of decentralized delivery planning, when ordering decisions are shifted to the level of the last link in the network (market).

When this method is used, it is possible to use partial IT support to support individual activities in the planning process. A uniform standard of such support has not yet been developed.

The author did not find any sources in the literature to identify the origin or author of F. Marek (B) Faculty of Management Engineering, Poznan University of Technology, Jacka Rychlewskiego 2, 60-965 Poznań, Poland e-mail: marek.fertsch@put.poznan.pl © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_23 339 340 F. Marek the traditional method of the market operation. This state prompts him to hypothesize that it arose a long time ago as a result of practical experience.

The method of distribution requirements planning is an adaptation for the needs of distribution the method material requirements planning (MRP I) originally developed for the production needs. The basis of its operation is a description of the structure of the distribution network. In this description, each node of the network (market or intermediate warehouse) is assigned a node from which deliveries of a specific assortment item take place.

Each assortment item has a fixed delivery cycle and delivery quantity (alternatively, instead of a fixed delivery quantity the method of determining its size may be specified). Delivery plans are built for individual assortment item and then decomposed into supply plans for individual network nodes. The DRPI method works well in conditions of continuity and stability of demand.

Is usually used in the situation of centralized supply planning, when the decisions on supply planning are moved to the level of network management. This method has a proven IT support standard. This is the so-called ERP system equipped with the DRPI module. Distribution requirements planning method, established in the 70 s of the last century, it is described in detail in the literature.

A characteristic feature of both methods discussed above is that they work well in conditions of continuity and stability of demand. In distribution networks, such conditions are enforced by actions in the areas of shaping the sale offer and determining the rules of its availability. The flexibility of operating and responding to changes in demand, which is necessary in practical conditions, is achieved through the interventions of planners.

2 Delivery Plan as an Object of Optimization—An Attempt to Systematize Both of previously described supply planning methods are heuristic. They are widely used in practice. Their use allows for the development of satisfactory (but not optimal) plans. Under real conditions, their use does not ensure the development of optimal plans or identify how far the satisfactory plans are distant from the optimal plan.

This situation has prompted many researchers to attempts to formulate the model of optimal supply planning. Many models of optimal supply planning and a large number of publications were created. There are so many of them that an exhaustive critical discussion of them all probably exceeds the capabilities of one researcher. One of the reasons for these difficulties is that the problem of optimal supply planning occurs in many areas of business practice.

In addition to the distribution network, it occurs in the power industry as a problem of electricity distribution (Kersting 2012), in water supply (Bhave and Gupta 2006), in city logistics as a problem of the availability of public transport (Mason et al. 2017). A characteristic feature of each of the above-mentioned sub-areas is the occurrence of a number of unique restrictions resulting from the specificity of a given sub-area.

In such a complex situation, the The Supply Planning in the Distribution Network … 341 area of problems considered in this article will be limited to the sphere of physical distribution of material goods, characteristic of the operation of sales networks. The analysis of the state of knowledge in this area will be limited to an attempt to build a classification of supply planning methods used in of physical distribution of material goods found, in the literature.

The first of the approaches to optimal supply planning identified in the literature is the search optimum understood as minimal total cost network operations. The most widely presented example of such an approach in the literature is the minimum-cost flow problem—MCFP (Ahuja et al. 1993). MCFP is an optimization problem to find the cheapest possible way of sending a certain amount of flow through a flow network.

Many models based on other criteria have also been developed For optimal supply planning such criteria are: • minimum cost of delivery (Sifaleras 2013) • minimizing the total journey time (Merline et al. 2012) • minimizing transport work (Bravo and Vidal 2013) • minimization of resource size (Ming-Fung et al. 2015) • minimizing negative impact on the environment (Golinska et al. 2020) • multi-criteria optimization (Bouvy and Lukas 2007).

The second approach identified in the literature for supply planning is an approach that can be described as integrated. It is based on the assumption that supply planning should be integrated with demand planning. The inspiration for an integrated approach is an article published in 2015 in Sloan Management Review (Tate et al. 2015).

Following the literature on the subject and materials available on the Internet, one can get the impression that this publication has slightly interested the scientific sphere, but it has stimulated broad activity in the sphere of practice. The network has dozens of sources posted by consulting and training companies as well as software providers offering their services in the field of supply and demand integration.

Another of the approaches to supply planning identified in the literature is the approach that can be described as holistic (global). It does not consider the problem of optimal supply planning as a separate process, but connects it with the environment in which this process takes place (supply chain) or with other processes (selection of partners in the chain) (Mak and Su 2007).

Another approach identified in the literature for optimal delivery planning is an approach that can be described as tool-based. It does not focus on the optimality of the solution received but emphasizes the tools supporting the process of supply planning. Analyzing the materials available on the network, it can be seen that the tools offered are limited to ERP systems, sometimes supplemented with additional functionalities (advanced planning).

Materials posted on the web (offers, system rankings) come from software suppliers or consulting companies. 342 F. Marek 3 Method of Supply Planning in the Distribution Network The method presented in this article tries to combine two of the approaches briefly discussed above. The approach of searching for the optimal solution has been modified to strive to approach such a solution The criterion adopted in the method is to minimize total transport costs.

However, the method does not guarantee finding the optimal solution. In turn, the tool approach drew inspiration to create an IT tool that will cooperate and support solutions used in practice (traditional market operation method, DRP I). A distribution network structure model has been developed. This model can be implemented to describe the structure of the network using the Bill of Materials module in any ERP class system.

Model of distribution network structure: The structure of the distribution network for which delivery planning takes place consists of the following elements: a set of locations from which deliveries are made is given D = {di }, i = 1, . . . , n (1) where: n—the number of locations from which deliveries take place • to each location di is assigned the amount of a given assortment item aij that a given location can provide in the planning horizon   A = aij , j = 1, . . . , m, i = 1, . . .

, n (2) where: m—the number of items in the assortment that are subject to delivery • a set of locations to which deliveries should be planned is given S = {sk }, k = 1, . . .

, p (3) where: p—the number of locations to which deliveries should be planned p>n (4) The number of locations to which deliveries should be planned is greater than the number of locations from which deliveries take place • for each location sk , the quantity of a given assortment item zjk is assigned which should be delivered to a given location in the considered planning horizon   Z = zjk , j = 1, . . . , m, k = 1, . . .

, p (5) The Supply Planning in the Distribution Network … 343 • for any j—assortment item, the sum of the quantities that can be delivered from all n-locations from which deliveries take place is greater than the sum of the quantities to be delivered to all k—locations to which deliveries should be planned   aij > i zjk (6) k • quantity of any j—assortment item quantity aij that can be delivered by any location di is smaller than the sum of the quantities to be delivered to all k—locations to which deliveries should be planned  aij < zjk (7) k • any k—location to which deliveries should be planned can be supplied from any i—location from which deliveries take place • each pair of locations consisting of any i—location from which deliveries take place and any k—location to which deliveries should be planned is assigned the parameter lik which specifies the distance between the two locations L = {lik } (8) • the supply of transport services is higher than the demand • Transport costs depend on the distance traveled and the size of the transport.

They are calculated as the product of the distance, transport volume and rate per unit of transported load. • The criterion and optimization model were formulated on the basis of the developed network structure model. They have the form: Criterion:  lik xik −−min (9) I,k where: xik —volume of deliveries from i—location to k—location. Restrictions: for any j—product item  xik =  Ik aij < zjk (10) jk  xjk (11) k The algorithm of the method operation was developed.

It is based on dynamic programming (Fig. 1). 344 F. Marek Start 1. find the minimum z jk , zjk т 0 N 2 or more zjk equal ? 2. ɲ = zjk x lik , aij > 0 Y 3. ɲ = zjk x lik , aij > 0 4. find the minimum ɲ N 2 or more ɲ equal ? Y 5. find ɲ for the minimum k Y ɲ ш aij , , aij т 0 ? 7. aij = 0, zjk = ɲ - aij N 6. aij = aij - ɲ, zjk = 0 7. plan add supply “ik” to the supply Supply Plan N all zjk = 0 ? Y Stop Fig.

1 Algorithm for supply planning (Source own work) 4 Conclusions The method of dynamic supply planning in the distribution network presented in this article combines elements of two identified approaches to supply planning— searching for the optimal solution and a tool approach. It can complement and support the methods used in practice (traditional market operation method, DRP I). It uses the data generated by these methods as input in the distribution network model.

The method does not find an optimal solution supply plan. Enables you to improve pre-solutions generated by other methods at selected stage of planning. The Supply Planning in the Distribution Network … 345 The further research program assumes: – identification based on the literature of the reference method providing an optimal solution to the problem of developing an optimal delivery plan.

– development of a simple simulator, modeling the behavior of commonly used in practice delivery planning methods in cooperation with the developed method, – conducting a numerical experiment and comparing the results obtained using the simulator and the reference method. Acknowledgements The research was financed from the statutory research on topic no. 11/140/DSPB/4163 of the Faculty of Engineering Management at the Poznan University of Technology.

References Ahuja RK, Magnanti TL, Orlin JB (1993) Network flows. theory, algorithms, and applications. Prentice Hall Bhave PR, Gupta R (2006) Analysis of water distribution networks. Alpha Science International Bouvy C, Lukas K (2007) Multicriterial optimization of communal energy supply concepts. Energy Conver Manag 48(11):2827–2835.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2007.06.046 Bravo JJ, Vidal CJ (2013) Freight transportation function in supply chain optimization models: a critical review of recent trends. Expert Syst Appl 40(17):6742–6757 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Esse.2013.06.06 Golinska P, Wang L, Hui M (2020) Research on joint emission reduction in supply chain based on carbon footprint of the product. J Cleaner Product 121086. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.

2020.121086 Kersting WH (2012) Distribution system modeling and analysis. CRP Press Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL Mak KL, Su W (2007) Partner selection and production-distribution planning for optimal supply chain formation, Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering 2007 Vol II WCE 2007, July 2–4, 2007, London, U.K Mason R, Trentini A, Lehuédé F, Malhéné N, Péton O et al (2017) Optimization of a city logistics transportation system with mixed passengers and goods.

EURO J Transp Logist 6(1):81–109. Springer Merline JV, Rithaa W, Abrahamb A (2012) Total time minimization of fuzzy transportation problem. J Intell Fuzzy Syst 23:93–99. https://doi.org/10.3233/IFS-2012-0498 Ming-Fung FS, Ming L, Simaan MA, Resource supply-demand matching scheduling approach for construction workface planning. J Constr Eng Manag 142(1). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASC E)CO.1943-7.862.0001027 Sifaleras A (2013) Minimum cost network flows: problems, algorithms, and software.

Yugoslav J Oper Res 23(1):3–17. https://doi.org/10.2298/YJOR121120001S Tate WL, Mollenkopf D, Stank T, Lago da Silva A (2015) Integrating supply and demand.

MIT Sloan Management Review Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise Linear Warehousing Cost Structure Fabian Alexander Torres Cárdenas and Carlos Eduardo Díaz Bohórquez Abstract Since the recent growth of e-commerce, manufacturers are adapting traditional warehouses to dual-channel warehouses, which has a unique structure that is divided into two zones: the first one dedicated to fulfill online channel orders and the second dedicated to load and fulfill orders from the traditional retail channel.

However, adding a new sales channel creates new challenges in terms of inventory management due to differences in order size and fulfillment times. In addition to the large uncertainty of demand in the short and long term, it makes planning for storage capacity and allocation complex. Shorter delivery times and the trend of urbanization have led to dual-channel warehouses often near cities where access to land is difficult and expensive.

Manufacturers must find ways to maximize capacity utilization at their specific facilities or new facilities. The objective of this research is to establish an integrated inventory management and sizing model for the dualchannel warehouse, where the total size of the warehouse is determined, as well as the inventory policy for each of the channels.

A linear storage cost structure by parts is assumed, a difference from typical economical lot size models, the storage cost structure examined in this case is not the simple unit rate type but rather a more realistic function of the warehouse space to be acquired. A heuristic method for solving the problem was formulated and validated using numerical examples according to the problem.

Keywords Dual-channel warehouse · Inventory management · Sizing warehouse · Online fulfilment · Probabilistic demand F. A. Torres Cárdenas (B) · C. E. Díaz Bohórquez Universidad Industrial de Santander, Bucaramanga, Colombia e-mail: Fabian.torres1@correo.uis.edu.co C. E. Díaz Bohórquez e-mail: cediazbo@uis.edu.co © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_24 347 348 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez 1 Introduction Electronic commerce has shown significant growth in the last decade; according to the transfronterizo e-commerce study, the value of sales for 2019 is estimated at $3.4 trillion and will move $900 billion in international purchasing expenses by 2020.

More than 2,140 million is expected by 2021 people buy goods and services online worldwide, compared to 1.66 billion global digital buyers in 2016 (Statista 2014). This is due largely to manufacturers operating mainly in the traditional retail channel are adding an online sales channel. These channels differ in opportunity costs from lost sales and therefore require different levels of service. That should be added at the general inventory level and a company fulfilment policy (Agatz et al. 2008).

On the other hand, uncertainty in demand in the short and long term makes planning and allocating capacity complex. The scientific community has focused primarily on workforce planning, largely neglecting infrastructure and physical capacity issues such as storage area and equipment (Hübner et al. 2015). Therefore, warehouses or distribution centers must be prepared to fulfill orders from retail stores and online shoppers.

The conventional warehouse designed for order delivery from physical stores makes online order fulfillment complex, so the adaptation of the traditional warehouse to the dual-channel warehouse is gaining popularity, which has a unique structure that is divided into two zones: one to fulfill online channel orders and the other to store and fulfill traditional channel retail store orders, the advantages of this structure include reducing the cost of facilities through the construction of a warehouse integrated, reduced warehouse space and inventory required for both channels, increased coordination capacity and flexibility to fulfill online and offline orders, and higher service levels (Alawneh et al.

2017). However, with shorter delivery times, the urbanization trend has led to dual-channel warehouses often being located near cities where access to land is difficult and expensive, in which manufacturers seek ways to maximize the use of capacity in your existing facilities or the planning of a new facility in terms of storage size and the size of the storage areas for the traditional and online channel (Kembro et al. 2018).

Sizing is closely related to inventory policies, which are based on forecasting and demand analysis. This step should consider related costs and estimates of needs above and below, since an estimate of the excessive size of space needs could generate wasted space, while a smaller one can generate overcrowded conditions (Pires and Amorim 2015).

Although, in the previous works they take into account the capacity of the warehouse, this is represented as a space constraint, they assume the size of the warehouse as a known parameter where the cost of storage is part of the cost of inventory maintenance and is generally assumed which is proportional to the amount of inventory stored (Allgor et al. 2004; Xu 2005; Alawneh et al. 2017).

However, warehouse space in real environments is often only available in a few fixed sizes, for example, if a multi-store warehouse were to be built, the total available space would depend on the number of floor levels required or in the case In a leased warehouse, the leasing space units are generally located in discrete parts of the gross floor area (Goh Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 349 et al. 2001).

The main objective is to establish an integrated inventory management and sizing model for the dual-channel warehouse in which the total size of the warehouse is determined, as well as the inventory policy for each of the channels. The linear piecewise storage cost structure provides a more realistic cost value of the warehouse space to be purchased.

Since the problem is a constrained nonlinear programming model, the bisection algorithm is applied to solve the dual Lagrange problem in which the capacity constraint is equal to zero to achieve a balance between purchased space and inventory level of each of the channels to minimize the cost of inventory and the cost of storage in the warehouse. The method was validated by numerical examples according to the problem. The rest of this article is organized as follows.

Section 2 presents the literature review. Section 3 presents the description of the problem and the notation. In Sect. 4 the integrated mathematical model. Section 5 exposes the methodology used. Section 6 modified bisection method. Section 7 presents and discusses numerical results and sensitivity analysis, respectively. Finally, the conclusion, discussion and future works are discussed in Sect. 8.

2 Literature Review The distribution channel plays a very important role in the management of the supply chain. Initially, manufacturers produce the products and ship them to retailers, then customers visit retail stores to purchase the product based on their needs. This distribution system is called the traditional channel that still exists in business (Karim and Xu 2018). However, with the expansion of electronic commerce, new distribution systems have been created (Clemons et al.

2000) an example of these is the dualchannel supply chain, in which manufacturers in addition to selling in the traditional channel has added a direct online channel (Chiang and Monahan 2005).The direct online channel allows manufacturers to directly interact with customers to offer their products and services without intermediaries that guarantee a greater profit margin and minimize costs (Dumrongsiri et al. 2008; Cattani et al. 2006).

This allows to collect information about customers, to understand their preferences, and also to produce personalized products that adapt to their needs (Batarfi et al. 2016). Two research approaches were observed in dual-channel supply chain inventory management investigations; the first approach is coordination between channels and the second approach is competition between them.

Chiang and Monahan (2005) proposed a dual channel supply chain coordination model, inventory is held in the manufacturer’s warehouse, to meet both direct channel demand online and demand from a retail store; each channel receives independent requests; however, there is a probability of going to the other channel if any of them is out of stock.

The authors develop an inventory control strategy, where they calculate the operating cost of the system by determining inventory holdings and lost sales costs, and compare the dual channel strategy with that of a single channel obtaining better results when using the dual channel strategy. Geng and Mallik (2007) studied the competition between a 350 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez manufacturer-owned direct online channel and a retail channel.

Considering that the manufacturer has limited production capacity. Defined that, in one channel you find out-of-stock products, a fraction of dissatisfied customers visit the other channel. They developed a Stackelberg approach, which is that one of the two channels is the leader, in this case the manufacturer and the other is the follower, the retailer.

The leader has two decisions: the inventory level and the quantity of dispatch in each order to the retailer and based on these decisions the retailer decides his inventory level. They demonstrated that the manufacturer had the possibility of denying the inventory to the retailer even when its capacity was sufficient, obtaining greater benefit from this decision. On the other hand, (Teimoury et al.

2008) developed a mathematical model for the dual channel supply chain between a manufacturer with a direct online channel and a retailer in which they define that when considering the costs of sales lost in a way Independent; that is, each channel manages its own cost, this can have a significant effect on the inventory level. Then (Takahashi et al.

2011) studied a dual channel supply chain in which they consider the decision of production and delivery of products and proposed an inventory control strategy, with the aim of reducing costs inventory maintenance, lost sales costs as well as production and delivery costs. Warehouse management has been a fundamental aspect of managing the dualchannel supply chain since these have undergone major changes in recent decades, influencing mainly the design and operations of the warehouse.

The complexity of warehouse operations has been multiplied by storing a large variety of SKUs in small quantities (De Koster et al. 2017). The small size of the transaction differs with the size of the store’s replenishment order and requires pick-and-pack order fulfillment operations that are labor intensive (high variable cost) or automation (high capital investment) (Agatz et al. 2008; Hübner et al. 2015; Kembro et al. 2018).

Therefore, the adaptation of operations and design to the particular context is receiving more attention in storage theory. Two common strategies for warehouses in the dual channel business environment are decentralized and centralized policies.

A company with a decentralized warehousing policy establishes an electronic fulfillment warehouse, where the online channel order is selected, packaged, and shipped independently to the primary warehouse, which means having separate inventory teams and business operations teams (Bendoly 2004; Alawneh et al. 2017; Ishfaq and Bajwa 2019). Among the major studies related to decentralized policy highlights made by Allgor et al. (2004) and (Xu 2005). Allgor et al.

(2004) investigated the setup of different inventory models in a compliance warehouse, which was divided into two areas: collection area, where items are stored individually in containers, and a reserve area, where items are stored in bulk on pallets bearing note the space constraint. This to minimize the cost of maintenance and labor, with a policy of periodic inventory review with stochastic demand. For its part, the study by (Xu 2005) considered delays in sending and preorders information.

While the option of separating channels provides versatility in order fulfillment online, this option requires additional operating capital, as well as a higher level of inventory in the system, due to the need Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 351 to maintain separate security stocks at various facilities in the distribution network (Ishfaq and Bajwa 2019).

On the other hand, the centralized policy is based on using a centralized warehouse, that is, an integrated warehouse or several warehouses grouped in the same location, to serve both direct online channel orders and traditional channel orders. Seifert et al. (2006) developed mathematical models for the decentralized and centralized dual channel supply chain. They showed that when the chain is centralized, the cost savings are significant, in addition to benefiting the retailer and customers.

Yao et al.

(2009) studied three different inventory strategies: (1) centralized, (2) Stackelberg’s approach in which the retailer is the leader, and (3) a strategy in which the operation of direct channel online is outsourced to a third party logistics provider (Third Party Logistic, 3PL), in a dual channel supply chain comprising a manufacturer and a retailer, in which it defined the inventory level for both direct channel online from manufacturer to retailer, in order to maximize the expected profit.

The first study of the dual-channel warehouse was carried out by Alawneh et al.

(2017) based on inventory management in the dual-channel supply chain, in which a manufacturer uses the warehouse that is divided into two areas with different levels inventory: one low-density area for online order fulfillment (Stage 1), where all products must be accessed, individually stored in containers, and the other highdensity area to fulfill larger orders for Retail stores (Stage 2) that are stored on pallet and replenish low density area to fulfill online orders.

They developed a multiitem inventory model under a continuous inventory review (Q, R) policy in which they consider the warehouse capacity constraint, the uncertainty in demand and the delivery time in which the inventory level is determined. for each of the channels and the replacement of each one of them. They highlight for future research the importance of determining the size of each of the areas (Stages 1 and 2) and how it affects total costs.

3 Problem Description and Notation 3.1 Problem Description It is considered a dual channel warehouse owned by a manufacturer under a decentralized policy which satisfies the demand of the traditional channel of retail stores and the direct online channel of the manufacturer.

Orders placed by the manufacturer reach the reserve area (Step 2) from where it is delivered to retail stores and exclusive collection area for online order fulfillment (Stage 1); An important difference between these channels is the order delivery time, for stores they tend to be longer because they are scheduled in advance and for online orders that have a shorter time due to the speed required to fulfill them.

Due to the importance of having an integrated policy to define the inventory level of each of the channels and an adequate warehouse size to meet the demand of both retail stores and the direct online channel, 352 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez an integrated inventory management model is proposed.

and sizing for the doublechannel warehouse in which the total size of the warehouse is established, as well as that of each of the storage areas, the inventory management policy, taking as a reference that the demand is uncertain, as well as the time delivery. Difference from previous studies this study takes the storage cost structure behaves as a piecewise linear function based study (Goh et al. 2001) for sizing stores.

In which \gamma: storage space required by a maintenance unit is the space, bn: Annualized fixed cost to acquire an amount of space sn and cn: Variable cost of storage per unit of item in sn. Thus, integrating the inventory management and sizing model.

3.2 Notations and Assumptions The following notation and assumptions were used for this investigation i Item index j Stage index, where j = 1 for warehouse area dedicated to satisfying online demand (online picking area), and j = 2 for warehouse area dedicated to satisfying both retail and dedicated online area demands n Sizes of warehouse index Lij Length of lead time for item i in stage j (random variable) Dij Expected annual demand for item i in stage j hij Holding cost per unit time for item i at stage j Bij Backorder cost per unit for item i at stage j Aij Ordering cost per order for item i at stage j xij Demand during lead time (DDLT, random variable) for item i in stage j f (xij ) Probability density function of lead-time demand for item i at stage j μij Mean of item i demand in stage j σij Standard deviation of item i demand in stage j γij Storage space required by a stock keeping unit in stage j α Minimum required probability that total order quantities will be within warehouse space Sn Discrete choices of warehouse sizes available bn The annualized fixed cost of acquiring Sn Cn Variable storage cost per unit item en el size warehouse Sn θ Lagrange multiplier for the warehouse space constraint Qi2 Order quantity for item i in Stage 2 Qi1 Order quantity for item i in Stage 1 Ri2 Reorder point when new order is placed for item i in Stage 2 Ri1 Reorder point when new order is placed for item i in Stage 1 (continued) Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 353 (continued) i Item index C total inventory cost and warehousing costs: Please note that the first paragraph of a section or subsection is not indented.

The first paragraphs that follows a table, figure, equation etc. does not have an indent, either. The assumptions used in this research: • The demand rate per unit time is a random variable and the item lead times are constant. • The inventory policy used is a continuous review (Q, R). • Backorder conditions occur when a request cannot be met from the existing provisions with a prescribed penalty fee.

• Each stage has its own reorder point value obtained from the sum of DDLT expectation values and safety stock. • For the case of multi-SKUs stored in the same warehouse, we assume that each type of SKU is assigned some dedicated storage space. Consequently, the total warehouse space required is the sum of the ordering sizes for all the SKUs stored.

4 Mathematical Model Objective: Min the total expect cost (the combined inventory and warehousing costs)    Ai j Di j  Min C Q i j , Ri j = Qi j i + j  i + bn +  hi j 2 j  i Qi j   ⎡  + Ri j − μ x i j i  ∞ ⎤   Bi j Di j ⎢   ⎥    ⎢ x i j − Ri j f x i j d x i j ⎥ + ⎣ ⎦ Q j ij Ri j C n Q i j + Ri j − μ x i j (1) j The first term of the objective function (1) refer to the annual ordering cost, which is the order cost multiplied by the number of cycles.

The second term refer to the annual approximated holding cost. The third term represent the annual backorder cost, which is equal to the backorder cost multiplied by the expected number of shortages per cycle. The fourth term refer to the annualized fixed cost of acquiring Sn . The fifth term refer to variable storage cost per unit item en el size warehouse Sn , the annualized variable cost component related to the actual quantity stored and handled.

Reorder point is determined by the following equation Ri j = μxi j + z i j σi j   formulated as a function of the safety factor zij so z i j σi j = Ri j − μxi j . The space constraint  i j   γi j Q i j + z i j σi j − Sn − μY − Z 1−α ∗ σY ≤ 0 (2) 354 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez Space constraint (2) considers the space occupied by the sum of all the orders plus the security inventory minus the space that the average demand would occupy during the lead time Eq. (4).

Because of uncertain demand, it is set the probability that the total simultaneous items inventory within the warehouse space when the order is received will not be smaller than α (Alawneh et al. 2017).

If the DDLT for item i in stage j is in a situation where the demand and lead time are normally distributed and statistically independent, then the mean and standard deviation of the DDLT are: μxi j = μ L i j × μdi j σxi j = μY =  i  μ L i j × σd2i j + μ2di j × σ L2i j γi j μi j ; σY2 =  j i (3) γi2j σi j (4) j The expected shortage per cycle (Kundu and Chakrabarti 2012; Alawneh et al. 2017).

 ∞  E SC Ri j =     σxi j  1 + z i2j − z i j x i j − Ri j f x i j d x i j = 2 (5) Ri j We consider a Lagrange function      Ai j Di j L Q i j , zi j , θ = + hi j Qi j i + bn + j i  i   + z i j σxi j 2 j  Qi j  ⎡ Cn Q i j + z i j σi j + θ ⎣ j +   Bi j Di j  σxi j  1 + z i2j − z i j Qi j 2 i  i  j γi j Q i j + z i j σxi j ⎤ − sn − μ Y − z 1 − α ⎦ (6) j Using the necessary Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions for minimization problems, we obtain Ai j Di j hi j ∂L − = 0, − + ∂ Qi j Qi j 2 Bi j Di j  σ  xi j 1 + z i2j − z i j 2 Q i2j + Cn + θγi j = 0 (7) Getting:       2  2Di j Ai j + Bi j σxi j 1 + z − z ij ij  2 Qi j = h i j + 2γi j θ + 2Cn ⎡ ⎛ ⎞⎤ Bi j Di j ⎣ ⎝ z i j ∂L ⎠⎦ + Cn σxi j + θ γi j σxi j = 0 = 0, h i j σi j + σxi j  ∂z i j 2Q i j 1 + z2 ij (8) (9) Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 355 If we substitute (7) into (8), we have ⎡ ⎛ ⎞⎤ Bi j Di j zi j ⎣ ⎝   − 1⎠⎦ + h i j σi j + Cn σxi j + θ γi j σxi j = 0 σxi j     2 σxi j  1 + z  2 −z i j A 2D +B 1+z 2 ij ij ij ij  2 ij h i j +2γi j θ+2Cn (10) The value of zij is determined using Matlab software given the complexity of solving zij    ∂L = γi2 (Q i2 + σxi2 z i2 ) + γi1 Q i1 + σxi1 z i1 − Sn − μY − z 1−α ≤ 0 (11) ∂θ i 5 Methodology Data: This is a theoretical investigation which is based on secondary data from the numerical examples proposed by (Alawneh et al.

2017) inventory management data such as: order cost, inventory maintenance cost, cost of pending orders are also selected Specification of the product based on the demand and space requirements of each product in each storage area, for the warehouse sizing, the parameters of storage cost by parts of the work performed by (Fern 2007) are taken as reference: cost storage variable per item unit, annualized fixed cost to acquire a quantity of space (warehouse size), available warehouse sizes.

Inventory model. The inventory model used is the Probabilistic Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) model with a continuous review system for probabilistic demand conditions and warehouse sizing.

The determination of the inventory model parameters is carried out with the following steps: (1) Determine the size of the order lot and the order points with pending order without space restriction; (2) Apply the bisection algorithm to find the solution of the Lagrange multiplier starting from the verification of the space restriction; (3) Calculate the area requirements for products in each storage area; (4) Calculate the quantity of the order and the point of order, with pending orders and restrictions for the warehouse area in which it is taken into account for the dimensioning of the warehouse is available in discrete sizes in which the total size of warehouse and storage areas; (5) Finally, determine the total expected inventory cost.

(6) Sensitivity Analysis: Sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine the effect of changes in parameters on optimal ordering lot size and total inventory costs. 356 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez 6 Modified Bisection Method It consists of starting from an interval [x0, x1] such that f (x0) f (x1) < 0, so we know that there is at least one real root.

From this point the interval is reduced successively until it becomes as small as the precision that we have decided correctly requires. an ≤ kn ≤ bn where the initial values are given by: a0 : = a and b0 : = b (Fern 2007) kn = xn+1 = (an + bn ) 2 (12) an+1 = {an if f (an ). f (kn )0; kn if f (an ). f (kn )0} (13) bn+1 = {bn if f (bn ). f (kn )0; kn if f (bn ). f (kn )0} (14) Based on the algorithm proposed by Alawneh et al.

2017) adapted bisection search to the sizing problem, calculating the best solution for each of the warehouse sizes to solve the Lagrangian dual problem. For a given value of θ, Qij and zij can be calculated using (7) or (9); then they can be substituted into Eq. (10). This reduces the problem to a solution for one equation with one unknown θ in which each of the warehouse sizes is evaluated:    i1 + σxi1 i2 + σxi2 γi2 ( Q z i2 ) + γi1 Q z i1 − Sn − μY − z 1−α = 0 (15) g(θ ) = i 1.

Let a0 = θ1 = 0 and let b0 = θ2 must be a number, such that g(θ ) < 0. b, a, z a be the solution when θ = θ1 , Q z b and let be the solution when θ = 2. Let Q θ2 . 2 and and solve for Q z; find g(θ ). 3. Let kn = θ = θ1 +θ 2 4. If g(θ ) > 0, then θ1 = θ, Q 1 = Q, and z1 = z; if g(θ ) < 0, them θ2 = θ , and 2 = Q, z2 = z. Q 5. If (g(θ1 ) − g(θ2 )) < εg , then stop. Otherwise, go to 3. 6. This process is repeated for each of the available sizes of warehouse Sn .

7 Numerical Results and Sensitivity Analysis Numerical examples and results Table 1 were taken as reference for the warehouse sizing an example of four discrete choices of warehouse sizes for the inventory costs proposed by Yao and Huang (2017) and Table 2 shows an example proposed by Alawneh et al. (2017) for an item normal distribution demand and stochastic lead time.

Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 357 Table 1 An example of four discrete choices of warehouse sizes n 1 2 3 4 Sn (0, 3817) (3817, 11391) (11391, 17840) (17840, ∞) bn 157.4 212.4 338.2 457.5 Cn 9.35 8.03 6.42 4.61 Table 2 Example 1 normal distribution demand and stochastic lead time Parameter Value Parameter Value Parameter Value γ11 100 1 σ12 j 1,2 A11 40 γ12 50 D11 120 A12 4000 z1-α −1.3 D12 1600 h11 20 μ11 30 h12 10 μ12 750 b11 50 σ11 10 b12 2000 i 50 Table 3 Results for Example 1 with normal distribution demand and stochastic lead time Sn g(θ) θ R11 R12 Q11 Q12 Total cost S1 −0.001988 0.73795 36 1019 16 573 39457 S2 −0.000104 0.45143 37 1045 19 690 35152 S3 0.0097095 0.30443 38 1063 22 794 32051 S4 −0.003945 0.19814 39 1079 25 913 28982 Table 3 shows the results for each of the warehouse sizes.

being the warehouse size S4 the one with the lowest total cost for example 1. approximate total warehouse size 25000, stage j: 1 = 2500; stage j: 2 = 22500; Table 4 shows the inventory and storage costs in which size S4 has the highest Annual holding cost and Annualized fixed cost of acquiring Sn, but the costs of Table 4 Inventory and storage costs results for Example 1 Sn Annual ordering cost Annual holding cost Annual backorder cost Annualized fixed cost of acquiring Sn Variable storage cost per unit item S1 11460 5834.6 13922 157.4 8082.3 S2 9525.9 6737.1 10554 212.4 8122.5 S3 8282.2 7481.8 8649.4 338.2 7299.1 S4 7198.4 8284.9 7157.9 457.5 5883.8 358 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez Table 5 An example two items normal distribution demand and stochastic lead time Parameter Value Parameter Value Parameter Value i 1,2 σ11 0.5 B21 0.5 j 1,2 σ12 4 B22 8 D11 240 σ21 0.3 h11 1 D12 2400 σ22 2.9 h12 10 D21 350 A11 50 h21 0.5 D22 4500 A12 125 h22 8 μ11 3 A21 40 γ11 25 μ12 120 A22 100 γ12 12 μ21 2.5 B11 10 γ21 15 μ22 100 B12 60 γ22 7 Annual ordering cost, Annual backorder cost and Variable storage cost.

per unit item are less than others. Table 5 shows the data corresponding to an example with 2 products with normal demand and stochastic lead time. Table 6 shows the results for each of the warehouse sizes. being the warehouse size S1 the one with the lowest total cost for example 2. approximate total warehouse size 3817, stage j: 1 = 625; stage j: 2 = 3192.

Table 7 shows the inventory and storage costs in which size S1 has the highest Annual ordering cost and Annual backorder cost, but the costs of Annual holding cost, Annualized fixed cost of acquiring Sn and Variable storage cost per unit item are less than others.

Table 6 Results for example 2 two items with normal distribution demand and stochastic lead Sn g(θ) θ R11 R12 R21 R22 Q11 Q12 Q21 Q22 S1 −0.0003 0.840 3.242 136.7 2.65 106.0 22.01 235.7 29.06 286.2 S2 0.0014 0.115 3.352 143.9 2.70 109.0 40 559.2 49.49 689.9 S3 −0.0157 0.026 3.361 146.1 2.70 110.0 47.15 846.9 56.46 1072 S4 0.0005 0.025 3.361 146.1 2.70 110.0 47.27 854.0 56.57 1082 Table 7 Inventory and storage costs results for Example 2 Sn Annual ordering cost Annual holding cost Annual backorder cost Annualized fixed cost of acquiring Sn Variable storage cost per unit item S1 3871.5 439.21 160.89 157.4 5575.2 S2 1771.5 883.64 50.585 212.4 11018 S3 1276.2 1189.7 32.347 338.2 13225 S4 1268.3 1196.8 32.088 457.5 9576.2 Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 359 Table 8 Effect of model parameters on the optimal solutions Scenario R11 R12 R21 R22 Q11 Q12 Q21 Q22 Total cost D 3.24 136.75 2.65 106.0 22.01 235.74 29.06 286.22 10204 D + 10% 3.25 136.78 2.65 106.09 22.14 235.42 29.30 285.73 10602 D-10% 3.23 136.72 2.65 106.08 21.86 236.13 28.78 286.81 9807.2 μ + 10% 3.55 149.07 2.90 116.21 22.73 244.93 29.96 297.46 10282 μ-10% 2.93 124.43 2.40 95.95 21.28 226.58 28.15 275.03 10138 B + 10% 3.27 137.45 2.65 106.37 21.76 237.61 28.70 283.10 10222 B-10% 3.20 136.01 2.65 105.77 22.27 233.77 29.45 289.56 10186 S1-10% 3.22 136.20 2.65 105.86 20.76 220.24 27.51 267.28 10101 S1-20% 3.20 135.63 2.65 105.63 19.49 204.81 25.90 248.46 10039 7.1 Sensitivity Analysis Table 8 shows the results obtained, in terms of reorder point and order quantity for an increase and decrease in 10% each parameter: demand (total expected demand and the average of DDLT), the cost of pending order and the available warehouse space.

Increasing and decreasing the expected annual demand by 10%, the total cost increases and decreases by an average of 3.90% and 3.88% respectively. Increasing and decreasing DDLT by 10%, the total cost increases and decreases by an average of 0.76% and 0.64% respectively. If the warehouse size is decreased by 20% compared to 10% the total cost decreases by 1.67%.

Finally, If the warehouse size is decreased by 20% compared to 10%, the total cost decreases by 1.67%, the reorder point is not affected by the change.

8 Conclusion In this work, a joint dimensioning and inventory management model for a dualchannel warehouse was developed, which sought to establish the indicated size of the warehouse and the inventory policy, minimizing the total expected cost, bearing in mind that the cost of storage behaved as a piecewise linear function that provides an approach to current storage costs. considering the uncertainty in the demand and in the lead time.

it was solved using the bisection search method and validated using numerical examples.

Performing warehouse sizing and inventory management together provides flexibility in defining the appropriate warehouse size where the required inventory level can be met for each of the sales channels, be it for a single item in which it was determined that the size that provided the least cost was the largest, unlike the example of multiple items, the most appropriate warehouse size was the smallest, taking as a reference that the costs that most influence the decision are Annual holding cost, 360 F. A. Torres Cárdenas and C. E. Díaz Bohórquez Annual backorder cost and Variable storage cost per unit item.

In the sensitivity analysis, it was shown that the parameter that has the greatest impact on total cost is the increase in demand and the average decrease between 3.90% and 3.88% respectively. For future research, consider joint replenishment for each of the stages to make an approach to the current electronic commerce environments. Additionally, consider a random storage using the warehouse design with mixed shelves for the online picking area as a reference.

Also, future investigations formulate different methods of solution such as heuristics and metaheuristics in order to evaluate the problem with larger examples. References Agatz NAH, Fleischmann M, van Nunen JAEE (2008) E-fulfillment and multi-channel distribution—a review. Eur J Oper Res 187(2):339–356 Alawneh F, Zhang G (2018) Dual-channel warehouse and inventory management with stochastic demand.

Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev 112:84–106 Allgor R, Graves S, Xu PJ (2004) Traditional inventory models in an e-retailing setting: atwo-stage serial system with space constraints. In: Proceedings on 2004 SMA Conference, pp 6–12 Batarfi R, Jaber MY, Zanoni S (2016) Dual-channel supply chain: a strategy to maximize profit. Appl Math Model 40(21–22):9454–9473 Bendoly E (2004) Integrated inventory pooling for firms servicing both on-line and store demand.

Comput Oper Res 31(9):1465–1480 Cattani K, Gilland W, Heese HS, Swaminathan J (2006) Boiling frogs: pricing strategies for a manufacturer adding a direct channel that competes with the traditional channel. Prod Oper Manag 15(1):40–56 Chiang WK, Monahan GE (2005) Managing inventories in a two-echelon dual-channel supply chain. 162:325–341 Clemons E, Gu B, Row M (2000) eCommerce and eDistribution : understanding the role of power when selecting alternatives channel strategies.

Melbourne institute of applied economic and social research working paper, pp 1–39 De Koster RBM, Johnson AL, Roy D (2017) Warehouse design and management. Int J Prod Res 55(21):6327–6330 Dumrongsiri A, Fan M, Jain A, Moinzadeh K (2008) A supply chain model with direct and retail channels. Eur J Oper Res 187(3):691–718 Fern C (2007) Convergencia Lineal y el algoritmo de bisección.

Rev Educ Matemática 22(3):16–21 Geng Q, Mallik S (2007) Inventory competition and allocation in a multi-channel distribution system. Eur J Oper Res 182(2):704–729 Goh M, Jihong O, Chung-Piaw T (2001) Warehouse sizing to minimize inventory and storage costs. Nav Res Logist 48(4):299–312 Hübner A, Holzapfel A, Kuhn H (2015) Operations management in multi-channel retailing: an exploratory study.

Oper Manage Res 8(3–4):84–100 Ishfaq R, Bajwa N (2019) Profitability of online order fulfillment in multi-channel retailing. Eur J Oper Res 272(3):1028–1040 Karim MT, Xu Q (2018) Review Dual-channel supply chain pricing and coordination. Int J Bus Appl Soc Sci 4(9):93–108 Kembro JH, Norrman A, Eriksson E (2018) Adapting warehouse operations and design to omnichannel logistics: a literature review and research agenda.

Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manage 48(9):890–912 Dual Channel Warehouse Sizing Under a Piecewise … 361 Kundu A, Chakrabarti T (2012) A multi-product continuous review inventory system in stochastic environment with budget constraint. Optim Lett 6(2):299–313 Pires M, Amorim P (2016) Design of retail backroom storage : a research opportunity ? Design of retail backroom storage: a research opportunity? No.

September, 201 Seifert RW, Thonemann UW, Sieke MA (2006) Integrating direct and indirect sales channels under decentralized decision-making. Int J Prod Econ 103(1):209–229 Takahashi K, Aoi T, Hirotani D, Morikawa K (2011) Inventory control in a two-echelon dual-channel supply chain with setup of production and delivery. Int J Prod Econ 133(1):403–415 Teimoury E, Mirzahosseinian H, Kaboli A (2008) A mathematical method for managing inventories in a dual channel supply chain.

Int J Ind Eng Prod Res 19(4):31–37 Statista (2019) Statista. Number of digital buyers worldwide from 2014 to 2021 (in billions) Xu PJ (2005) Order Fulfillment in Online Retailing: What Goes Where. MIT dissertation Yao MJ, Huang JY (2017) Optimal lot-sizing and joint replenishment strategy under a piecewise linear warehousing cost structure. J Intell Manuf 28(3):791–803 Yao DQ, Yue X, Mukhopadhyay SK, Wang Z (2009) Strategic inventory deployment for retail and e-tail stores.

Omega 37(3):646–658 Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable Facility Location Problems with Facility Disruptions Mohammad Rohaninejad, Zdeněk Hanzálek, and Reza Tavakkoli-Moghaddam Abstract This chapter considers the two-echelon supply chain network design with unreliable facilities when nodes related to facilities in both echelons fail under disruptions.

A new mixed-integer programming (MIP) model is proposed for a reliable facility location with possible customer reassignment in different probabilistic scenarios. The maintaining of the materials flow between different echelons of the network is investigated under network disruptions. The performance of global optimization is investigated by comparing this approach with independent and nonintegrated optimization.

The objective function of the problem seeks to minimize expected costs, including fixed and service costs in the supply chain, such that maintaining the demand flow in both echelons of the network interconnects them. The medium- and large-sized problems are solved using a custom-designed Lagrangian dual decomposition algorithm.

Our computational results show that the proposed algorithm is efficient for the given problems, efficiently overcomes the computational complexity of the problems, and provides good-quality solutions within an acceptable time.

Keywords Supply chain optimization · Reliable facility location · Dual decomposition · Location and allocation 1 Introduction Facility location problems involve the study of determining locations of |J| facilities with the finite or infinite capacity among |I| demand points, and making assignment decisions to serve a set of clients.

The objectives of location and allocation are to achieve a trade-off between first-stage setup costs and second-stage service M. Rohaninejad (B) · Z. Hanzálek Czech Institute of Informatics Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic e-mail: rohaninejad.sm@gmail.com R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam School of Industrial Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_25 363 364 M. Rohaninejad et al. and transportation costs. Facility location problems have extensively been studied; various types of facilities (e.g., factories, warehouses, stores, airports, hospitals, and emergency departments) have been examined (Rohaninejad et al. 2017).

In classical facility location problems, it is assumed that clients always get service from the facilities and the facilities are always available. Considering realistic situations, these assumptions are not likely valid. Every year, many companies are faced with unexpected events in their supply chain networks. From time to time, network performance can be disrupted for various reasons; for example, natural disasters, power outages, changes of ownership, operational risks, and strike actions.

The strategic nature of supply chain decisions differentiates them from operational-level decisions, such as machine scheduling and short-term material requirement planning. Hence, uncertainties in a supply chain can impose heavy costs on the system by completely stopping the flow of the network for a lengthy period. In this paper, this default assumption is used to design a reliable network, whose facilities are unreliable.

Continuous changes in the network structure (i.e., first-stage decisions) are impossible and without justification in facility location problems with facility disruptions. Designing optimal supply chains when facilities are subject to random disruptions is an appropriate response to dealing with this type of uncertainty, which is located in the class of provider-side uncertainty (randomness in facility capacity or reliability of facilities, etc.).

Considering reliability in facility location problems makes it possible that a system continues to function with the minimal loss when its components fail. Reliable design of a facility location problem considers a change in second-stage decisions by reassigning client demand to other facilities far from their regularly assigned facilities or arranging backup facilities for failed facilities.

The reliable uncapacitated facility location problem (RUFLP), was first studied by Snyder and Daskin (2005). They formulated the problem as a linear MIP, called “implicit formulation” (IF), which employed Lagrangian relaxation for efficient solutions. A similar study was presented by Berman et al. (2007), who relaxed the assumption of identical failure probabilities, which was a basic assumption of the model presented by Snyder and Daskin (2005).

Then, they developed several exact and heuristic approaches. Other studies, such as Cui et al. (2010) and Shen et al. (2011), have formulated the RUFLP with nonidentical failure probabilities. In addition to a scenario-based model of the problem, Shen et al. (2011) also provided a mixed-integer nonlinear programming model and provided several approximation algorithms that can produce near-optimal solutions. Cui et al.

(2010) proposed a compact mixed-integer programming (MIP) model and a continuum approximation (CA) model to study the problem and used Lagrangian relaxation to solve the models. In a reliable capacitated facility location problem (RCFLP), Aydin and Murat (2013) developed a model for the RCFLP and presented a novel hybrid method, namely swarm intelligence-based sample average approximation (SIBSAA), to solve their model. Peng et al.

(2011) presented an RCFLP to minimize the nominal cost (when no disruptions occur) and at the same time reducing the disruption risk by applying the p-robustness criterion, in which bounds the cost in disruption scenarios. Li et al. (2013a) investigated reliable facility location problems, while the failure of the facilities was correlated. Fan et al.

(2018) proposed a reliable Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 365 location model for a nexus of interdependent infrastructure systems. Their model aims to locate the optimal facility locations in multiple heterogeneous systems to balance the trade-off between the facility investment and the expected nexus operation performance. Afify et al.

(2019) are proposed an evolutionary learning technique to near-optimally solve Reliable p-Median Problem and Reliable Uncapacitated Facility Location Problem considering heterogeneous facility failure probabilities, one layer of backup and limited facility fortification budget. Multi-echelon supply chain design has been extensively studied in classical facility location problem.

To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there have been a few studies on the multi-echelon in reliable facility location problems. These studies assumed that facility disruption occurs only at one echelon of the network. For example, Razmi et al. (2013) proposed a scenario base mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) model for redesigning a reliable single product, single period, and two-echelon logistics network.

In this paper, we consider the two-echelon reliable facility location with unreliable facilities when nodes related to facilities in both echelons fail under disruptions. The analysis of problems that involve singleechelon supply chains and decisions made under that assumption may lead to many errors.

In other words, the single-echelon perspective on a supply chain of goods and services lacks the required accuracy and efficiency in cases, in which the network itself is part of a larger network and interacts with other echelons and layers of the network. Decisions, actions, and reactions at each echelon of the supply chain can have significant effects on other echelons. For this reason, we intend to study the RFLP by taking into account all the echelons of the supply chain. Rohaninejad et al.

(2018) first considered the RCFLP in a multi-echelon manner with the possibility of disruption in all echelons. They presented the new scenario-based formulation to maintain the materials flow between different echelons of the network under facilities disruptions.

In continue of their study, this paper examines whether the design of reliable multi-echelon facility location problems with a global optimization approach (i.e., integrated optimization in all echelons) is more effective than independent and non-integrated optimization.

The answer is to provide an insight for the owners of the supply chain, in which “how effective is the cooperation between the owners of each echelon of the network?” A review of the literature on the RFLP regarding complexity shows that the RUFLP is NP-hard (Li et al. 2013b). The RCFLP, which involves the addition of capacity constraints, is NP-hard as well because the RCFLP reduces to the RUFLP when the capacities of the facilities tend towards infinity.

In another hand, using the implicit formulation provided by Snyder and Daskin (2005) to provide lowcomplexity formulation has some drawbacks. This type of formulation has limitations when it is extended to problems with different failure probabilities for facilities, partial allocation of client demand to facilities, the possibility of partial disruption of facilities, facility capacity constraints and multi-echelon networks.

Tracking demand flows across different network echelons is not possible or not easy in multi-echelon networks by implicit formulation. So using the scenario-based formulation is in priority. The scenario-based approach is flexible and can be used for our considered problem; however, there might be numerous scenarios, (in our case, if J facilities 366 M. Rohaninejad et al.

are assumed that each of them can fail independently, there are 2 J failure scenarios) and the complexity of the model increases exponentially by increasing the number of scenarios. Therefore, due to the complexity of the model, a custom-designed Lagrangian dual decomposition algorithm is proposed for this problem. The literature on the RFLP presents various solution procedures: heuristic or approximation procedures (Shen et al. 2011; Rohaninejad et al. 2015; Aboolian et al.

2013); Lagrangian relaxation algorithms (Snyder and Daskin 2005; An et al. 2015); continuum approximation (Li and Ouyang 2010); exact methods (Rohaninejad et al. 2018; Hatefi and Jolai 2014) and metaheuristic algorithms (Aydin and Murat 2013; Peng et al. 2011). The remaining sections are organized as follows. The problem definitions are defined in Sect. 2. Section 3 presents a new MILP model of the problem. Section 4 illustrates the proposed solution method. Section 5 provides the computational results.

Finally, Sect. 6 outlines the conclusion and some suggestions for future research. 2 Problem Definition In this paper, we consider a two-echelon reliable facility location problem (TERFLP). While considering a two-echelon instead of single-echelon RFLP, we assume that there is the possibility of a failure of facilities at both echelons of the network. In the TE-RFLP, we assume that facilities at the first echelon of the chain are clients at the second echelon of the chain and vice versa.

In other words, the client demand at the second echelon of the supply chain is equal to the coefficient of the total client demand at the first echelon assigned to it as a facility at the first echelon. Demand in the first echelon is predetermined; however, the demand in the second echelons is uncertain and dependent on the first echelon. Therefore, it is necessary to examine two-echelon systems from an integrated perspective to enhance the reliability of the whole system.

Figure 1 depicts a schematic representation of the relationship between the echelons in a supply chain. This figure shows that potential sites at each echelon are potential clients at a higher echelon. As well, actual sites (openings) at each echelon are actual clients at a higher echelon. In this figure, it is clear that the flow of demand is interdependent at all echelons.

It is assumed, that the flow of demand may be discontinued from one echelon to a higher echelon, and demand is supplied from outside the network by paying a higher cost (i.e., penalty cost). In other words, all open facilities need to supply their client demand from inside the network (its higher echelons), or from the outside network by paying a penalty cost. In the TE-RFLP, the facilities have two operational levels, namely active and inactive.

In an active mode, the facilities are fully available and inactive facilities cannot provide any services to the clients and are out of reach.

The aim of solving this problem is to design a reliable network for a two-echelon supply chain to minimize the expected total fixed costs and service costs (including the expected transportation Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 367 Fig.1 Relationship between echelons in a two-echelon supply chain design costs and costs incurred for failing to meet client demand).

Other assumptions of the problem are as follows: • The potential sites for establishing facilities are predefined and discrete. • There is no relationship between facilities at an echelon. • The problem is a single-product model. • The allocation of a demand node to more than one facility node is not allowed. In other words, partial or fractional allocation of demand to a facility is not allowed. • There is a fixed cost to establish a facility.

• There is a transportation cost to allocate a demand node to a facility node. • There is a penalty cost for supplying demand from outside the network. • The maximum number of facilities that can be established in each location is one. • The network is two-echelon and all facilities in each echelon are the same (e.g., all facilities are wholesalers or retailers). • The problem parameters (e.g., demand in the first echelon, distance, and failure probabilities) are specified. 368 M. Rohaninejad et al.

3 Notation and Formulation The indices, parameters and variables of the proposed model are as follows: Model indices: i j l s Client index. Potential site index. Echelon index; (l = 1, 2). Scenario index s ∈ S Model parameters: di sl, j cl,i, j h l,i βj Il Jl qs bl, j,s G Demand quantity of client i in the first echelon. Fixed cost of opening facility j in echelon l. Transportation cost per unit demand of client i in echelon l that is serviced by facility j.

Penalty cost per unit of client i demand in echelon l if its demand is not met. Conversion coefficient of demand volume from the first echelon to the second echelon for facility j in the first echelon (1 ≤ β_j ≤ 2). Total number of clients in echelon l. Total number of potential sites in echelon l. Probability of scenario s. 1 if facility j in echelon l is active and functional under scenario s; 0, otherwise. A positive large number.

Model variables: yl, j X l,i, j,s Z l,i,s u i, j,s vi,s 1 if facility j at echelon l is opened; 0, otherwise 1 if client i assigned to facility j at echelon l under scenario s; 0, otherwise 1 if demand of client i at echelon l is not met under scenario s; 0, otherwise A positive variable specifies the demand of client i provided by facility j at second echelon under scenarios A positive variable specifies the demand of client i at second echelon that is not met under scenarios The mathematical model of the TE-RFLP based on the scenario-based formulation is as follows: ⎛ ⎞     ⎝ Min sl, j yl, j + c1,i, j di X 1,i, j,s + c2,i, j u i, j,s ⎠qs l s j≤Jl + s s.t  j≤J1 i≤I1 j≤J1    h 1,i di Z 1,i,s + i≤I1 X 1,i, j,s + Z 1,i,s = 1 i≤I2 j≤J2   h 2,i vi,s qs (1) ∀i ≤ I1 ; s (2) i≤I2 Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable …  X 2,i, j,s + Z 2,i,s ≤ 1 369 ∀i ≤ I2 ; s (3) j≤J2  u i, j,s + vi,s =   ∀i ≤ I2 ; j = i; s di  β j  X 1,i  , j  ,s (4) i  ≤I1 j≤J2 u i, j,s ≤ G X 2,i, j,s  ∀i ≤ I2 ; j ≤ J2 ; s (5) vi,s ≤ G Z 2,i,s ∀i ≤ I2 ; s (6) X l,i, j,s ≤ Gbl, j,s yl, j ∀l; j ≤ Jl ; s (7) i≤Il Objective function (1) consists of the total expected cost of facility fixed charge, transportation, and unmet demands penalty.

Constraints (2) and (3), which refer to the first and second echelons respectively, ensure that all actual client demand is supplied from inside or outside the network. Since not all the second-echelon clients will necessarily become actual clients in Constraint (3), inequality is used instead of equality. For this reason, Constraint (3) is not enough to establish the demand flow in the second echelon; we need to add Constraint (4) to the model.

Constraint (4), which refers to the second echelon (l = 2) of the supply chain, has conditions similar to Constraint (2). However, the right side of this constraint ensures when a facility in the first echelon becomes a client in the second echelon, its demand in the second echelon is a function of the number of orders it accepted in the first echelon.

The combination of Constraints (5) and (6) with Constraint (4) prevents a partial assignment (i.e., assigning a part of the client’s demand to a facility). Constraint (7) prevents assignment to a facility that has not been opened. 4 Lagrangian Dual Decomposition Lagrangian dual decomposition (LDD) is a classical method for combinatorial optimization.

This method is an important special case of the Lagrangian relaxation algorithm, in which the original problem decomposes to two or more combinatorial optimization problems. In this algorithm, we assume that there is a minimization problem as follows: Min f (x, z) + g(y, z) (x,y,z) (8) By decoding the problem, it can be found: Min (x,y,z 1 ,z 2 ) f (x, z 1 ) + g(y, z 2 ) (9) 370 M. Rohaninejad et al. s.t. z1 = z2 (10) We introduce a vector of Lagrange multiplier λ. The Lagrangian is now.

L(x, y, z 1 , z 2 , λ) = f (x, z 1 ) + g(y, z 2 ) + λ(z 1 − z 2 ) (11) And the dual objective is as follows: L(λ) = min L(x, y, z 1 , z 2 , λ) = (x,y,z 1 ,z 2 ) min { f (x, z 1 ) + g(y, z 2 ) + λ(z 1 − z 2 )} (x,y,z 1 ,z 2 ) = min { f (x, z 1 ) + λz 1 } + min {g(y, z 2 ) − λz 2 } (x,z 1 ) (y,z 2 ) = min{ f (x, z) + λz} + min{g(y, z) − λz} (x,z) (y,z) (12) Equation (12) is a lower bound for the original problem and the tightest lower bound can be shown by: max L(λ) = max min{ f (x, z) + λz} + min{g(y, z) − λz} (λ) (λ) (x,z) (y,z) (13) We solve each sub-problems of the relation (13) for the current λ separately and then update the λ for improve the sub-gradient level.

4.1 Custom Designed LDD To solve the proposed model, we decompose the model based on the N subsets N en = S. For creating each subset (en ; n = 1, . . . , N ) of scenarios, so that n=1 with the similar importance and weight, we first sort all scenarios based on their probability value (qs ) in a list, then for each subset, we select one scenario from the first of the list and then one another scenario from the end of the list.

We repeat this procedure until the subset is filled (i.e., the number of members reaches a predefined value), and then the next subset will create until all possible scenarios assign to a subset. Then, to do the LDD method, we introduce the new first stage variables yl,n j for each subsets of scenarios (yl,1 j , yl,2 j , . . . , yl,Nj |l = 1, 2; j = 1, . . . ., Jl ).

Finally, we add the non-anticipative constraints yl,1 j = yl,2 j = · · · = yl,Nj so that establish these constraints by equations as follows: N  n=1 k n yl,n j = 0 ∀l; j ≤ Jl (14) Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 371 where k 1 = 1 − N and k n = 1 for n = 2, . . . , N . Then, we relax the non-anticipative constraints and set the λ as a vector of Lagrangian multi-players that are related to these constraints.

The objective function of Lagrangian relaxation for each set of scenarios are as follows:  N    N N        1 n n n s yl, j + L(λ) = Min k yl, j + ϑ y n , en λl, j N l, j n=1 n=1 l j≤Jl n=1 l j≤Jl ⎞ ⎛  N   1    ⎝ s yl,n j + λl, j k n yl,n j + ϑ y n , en ⎠ (15) = Min N l, j n=1 l j≤J l where ⎛ ⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞⎞        ⎝ ⎝h 1,i di Z 1,i,s + ⎝h 2,i vi,s + ϑ y n , en = c1,i, j di X 1,i, j,s ⎠ + c2,i, j u i, j,s ⎠⎠qs s∈en i≤I1 j≤J1 i≤I2 (16) j≤J2 .

Now, we can decompose the problem to N subproblem with minimization of Relation (17) for each n ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Also, the feasible solution space of the problem will be divided based on each subset of scenarios. Min ⎧ ⎨   1 n≤N ⎩ l j≤Jl  s y n + λl, j k n yl,n j N l, j l, j ⎫  n ⎬ + ϑ y , en ⎭ (17) 4.2 Updating the Lagrangian Multiplayer The Lagrangian multipliers λl, j are updated at per iteration using standard subgradient optimization by Fisher (Fisher 2004).

So, given the initial value of multiplayer (λl,(0)j ), a sequence value of multiplayer in iteration (tλl,(t)j ) is generated by:  λl,(t)j = max 0, λl,(t−1) + β (t−1) j  N   k n yl,n j (18) n=1 yl,n j is optimal to the previous iteration and β (t) is a positive scaler step size. Z∗ − ZLB β (t) = (t−1) U B 2 N  n=1 k n yl,n j  (19) 372 M. Rohaninejad et al. In Eq. (19), Z U∗ B is the best upper bound so far. Z L B is the lower bound at the current iteration.

Also, (t−1) (0, 2] and we start with (0) = 2 and (t) is halved if the improvement in the Lagrangean lower bound is not more than 0.2% in L max consecutive iterations. 4.3 Generate the Upper Bound Gradient method, a feasibility procedure is applied to generate an upper bound for the Lagrangian problem. So, after obtaining the lower bound, we propose a simple heuristic method to find a feasible solution at per iteration of the Lagrangian procedure, but possibly not an optimal solution.

Since the non-anticipative Constraints (14) are relaxed, therefore, the yl,n j are not equal in different subsets of scenarios. So, we generate a feasible solution in three steps as follows. Step (1) Fixing the value of yl, j to 1 if they are 1 in minimum 50% of the optimal solution related to each subset of scenarios; 0, otherwise.

Step (2) Fixing the value of X l,i, j,s and their dependent variables (Z l,i,s , u i, j,s , vi,s ) for each i ≤ Il and s to their optimal value if Constraint (7) is not violated after inserting the value of yl, j . Step (3) Solve the simplified original model for finding the optimum value of remained variables in the feasible state. If the value of the new feasible solution is better than the incumbent upper bound, then the new value becomes the incumbent upper bound.

4.4 Pseudo Code of the Algorithm The step-by-step pseudo code of the proposed algorithm is outlined in Fig. 2. Fig.2 Pseudo code of the proposed LDD algorithm Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 373 Fig. 3 Compare the results obtained sp100;8;2 by changing the size of the scenario’s subsets Fig.

4 Compare the CPU time (seconds) of sp100;8;2 by changing the size of the scenario’s subsets 5 Computational Results In this section, the credibility of the presented mathematical model and the performance and effectiveness of the presented heuristic algorithm are evaluated and compared with each other. The mathematical model and the LDD method are coded in the GAMS 24.1.2 software and solved by the CPLEX solver for the MIP models and run on a PC with 4 GHz processor and 8 GB of RAM.

To compare the results of the proposed MIP formulation and LDD method two Relative Percentage Deviation criteria that called RPD is used. These performance measures are calculated based on the deviation of solutions to the best solution that achieved by MIP model and LDD. The RPD criterion for solution method A is calculated as follows (Note that the index A denotes a solution method. ): 374 M. Rohaninejad et al.

RPDA = (objectve function)A − Minimum(objectve functions) Minimum(objectve functions) (20) Also, to demonstrate the effectiveness and quality of LDD algorithm, we use three criteria (i.e., GAP1, GAP2, GAP3). The gap between the lower bound (LB) and the upper bound (UB) is calculated by: GAP1 = 2 ∗ UB − LB UB + LB (21) The distances between the upper bound (UB) and the optimal solution (OP) are denoted as GAP2, and between the lower bound (LB) and the optimal solution (OP) are denoted as GAP3.

The distances are calculated by: GAP2 = 2 ∗ UB − OP UB + OP (22) GAP3 = 2 ∗ OP − LB OP + LB (23) 5.1 Generating Random Instances of the Problem This section describes the testing of the proposed algorithms on 12 data sets that are generated randomly. The data set consists of 25–325 nodes for small to large instances. In each case, demands di in the first echelon are drawn from a normal distribution with (μ = 100; δ = 30) and rounded to the nearest integer.

Fixed costs sl, j for l = 1 are drawn from U[30,000; 80,000] and rounded to the nearest integer. Fixed costs sl, j for l = 2 are drawn from U[120,000; 200,000] and rounded to the nearest integer. Penalty costs h l,i are drawn from U[1000; 3000] and rounded to the nearest integer.   Also, for each instance with l Il clients and l Jl facilities, the locations of clients and facilities are within length and   a square,  determined  randomly  whose 2.8 − 0.01 .

Transportation I + J I + J width are equal to ∂ = l l l l l l l l costs cl,i, j are set equal to the Euclidean distance between i and j. The full failure probability of facilities in the first echelon is equal to 0.15 and in the second echelon is equal to 0.12. The scenarios of each instance are generated simply by taking into account all the possible combinations of active and inactive facilities.

The probability of each scenario is computed by multiplying the probabilities of facilities according to their situation in an active or inactive scenario. Ultimately, each instance is labelled with (a; b; c), where a indicates the number of clients in the first echelon; b indicates the number of potential sites in the first echelon (potential clients in the second echelon) and c indicates the number of potential sites in the second echelon.

The size of these parameters influences both the solution quality Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 375 and the efficiency of the proposed procedures.

To find the best trade-off between the algorithm speed and solution quality, the runtime of the solution methods is limited to 3600 s. 5.2 Numerical Examples In this subsection, we present the results of the numerical examples to show the validity of the proposed mathematical model and the efficiency of the presented solution method. Table 1 shows a comparison of the optimal results obtained by the scenario-based MIP model and the proposed LDD algorithm.

This table shows that the proposed LDD algorithm can provide the optimal solution in all cases, which the scenario-based formulation is provided with a feasible solution in predefined time restriction (i.e., 3600 s). When the size of the problem increases, the scenario-based formulation loses its effectiveness; solving problems of sp100;10;2 and larger is not possible with this formulation in predefined time restriction. Instead, the LDD can obtain a feasible solution for larger-sized problems.

Therefore, considering the average difference of 0% between the best upper bound of the LDD algorithm and the optimal solution of the scenario-based formulation can be found by the LDD algorithm has the reasonable performance for larger-sized problems.

This algorithm can also reduce the total solution time of sp18;5;2 to sp100;8;2 cases from 7910 to 294 s. Finally, concerning the inefficiency of the scenario-based formulation for large-sized problems, we can Table 1 Comparison of the results obtained by the proposed mathematical model and LDD Sample problems Scenario-based formulation (CPLEX Solver) Proposed LDD algorithm (CPLEX Solver) Time (s) Best upper bound RPD (%) Time (s) Best upper bound RPD (%) sp18;5;2 45 2,241,719 0.0 12 2,241,719 0.0 sp30;5;2 753 3,712,944 0.0 26 3,712,944 0.0 sp50;8;2 2152 4,964,309 0.0 47 4,964,309 0.0 sp80;8;2 2607 7,319,741 0.0 77 7,319,741 0.0 sp100;8;2 2353 9,327,565 0.0 132 9,327,565 0.0 sp100;10;2 > 3600 - - 440 7,892,730 - sp120;12;3 > 3600 - - 1361 8,622,641 - sp150;15;4 > 3600 - - 2714 8,718,256 - sp200;15;4 > 3600 - - 2615 12,350,919 - sp200;20;5 > 3600 - - > 3600 14,748,366 - sp250;20;5 > 3600 - - > 3600 17,362,641 - sp300;20;5 > 3600 - - > 3600 22,477,543 - 376 M. Rohaninejad et al.

Table 2 Criteria related to the quality of the LDD algorithm Sample problems Proposed LDD algorithm Best upper bound Best lower bound Gap 1 (%) Gap 2 (%) Gap 3 (%) Optimal objective function sp18;5;2 2,241,719 2,241,719 0,00 0,0 0,00 2,241,719 sp30;5;2 3,712,944 3,703,125 0,26 0,0 0,26 3,712,944 sp50;8;2 4,964,309 4,941,372 0,46 0,0 0,46 4,964,309 sp80;8;2 7,319,741 7,285,340 0,47 0,0 0,47 7,319,741 sp100;8;2 9,327,565 9,002,588 3,55 0,0 3,5 9,327,565 sp100;10;2 7,892,730 7,621,409 3,50 - - - sp120;12;3 8,622,641 8,370,264 2,97 - - - sp150;15;4 8,718,256 8,405,831 3,65 - - - sp200;15;4 12,350,919 11,518,202 6,98 - - - sp200;20;5 14,748,366 13,564,572 8,36 - - - sp250;20;5 17,362,641 14,355,617 18,9 - - - sp300;20;5 22,477,543 16,539,741 30,4 - - - propose the LDD algorithm as a suitable alternative to the scenario-based formulation and an efficient algorithm for two-echelon reliable uncapacitated facility location problems.

Table 2 shows the criteria related to the performance of the LDD algorithm. The table shows that the LDD algorithm allows using of the scenario-based model for larger-sized problems. On the other hand, according to the gap criterion, we are confident that the LDD algorithm can provide high-quality solutions (i.e., optimal or most closely optimal solution) in problems. The Gap 1 criterion is less than 5% in the 8 first samples and also less than 10% in the10 first samples {sp18,5;2 to sp200;20;5}.

Therefore, we can recommend the use of the LDD algorithm to solve the scenario-based model of the TE-RFLP, especially for medium-sized problems. Figures 3 and 4 show the comparative graphs of the results obtained from the LDD algorithm by changing the size of scenario’s subsets, for the criteria of the best upper bound (UB) and lower bound (LB) values and also the CPU time. These graphs are shown for sp100;8;2.

In this examination, we consider five levels for the  |S| |S| |S| |S| |S| size of the scenario’s subsets, including 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 . These figures show the complexity of the problem is increased and the gap between the upper and lower bounds is decreased by increasing in the size of the subset. Based on these figures, creating a trade-off between the quality and complexity is so important by selecting the optimal size of subsets.

Table 3 shows the performance results of the LDD algorithm under the influence of changes in the failure probabilities of the facilities in the sp100,8;2. Based on this table results, the LDD algorithm shows sustainable performance under different scenarios of the failure probability and provided an optimal or near-optimal solution in many cases.

In the LDD algorithm, except for p1 = p2 = 0.9, where we see a Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 377 Table 3 Performance of the LDD as a result of changes in the failure probabilities Failure probability Proposed LDD algorithm MIP Model Best upper bound RPD (%) Optimal objective function 0.1 9,264,505 0.00 9,264,505 0.2 12,814,921 0.00 12,814,921 0.3 16,641,569 0.00 16,641,569 0.4 16,936,220 0.00 16,936,220 0.5 18,639,821 1.02 18,450,932 0.6 18,611,058 0.00 18,611,058 0.7 19,762,360 2.58 19,265,783 0.8 21,787,049 10.87 19,651,377 0.9 25,919,553 28.67 20,144,518 1.0 20,787,349 0.00 20,787,349 significant drop in quality (RPD = 28.67%), we do not notice any significant changes in the performance of this method in other failure probabilities.

The average RPD, regardless of p1 = p2 = 0.9, is 1.61%. Our models are based on the assumption of integrated optimization at all echelons. Establishing this assumption requires cooperation between the owners of all echelons of the network. Table 4 examines how effective is this cooperation. This table shows the results obtained from solving the model in the two approaches: the integrated optimization and hierarchical optimization.

Each echelon is independently optimized from other echelons in the hierarchical approach. At first, the lowest echelon of the network (i.e., echelon 1) is optimized and its results are fixed.

Next, the second Table 4 The results obtained from two integrated and hierarchical optimization Sample problems Integrated optimization (LDD algorithm) Hierarchical optimization (MIP formulation) RPD (%) Objective function RPD (%) Objective function sp18;5;2 0.0 2,241,719 10,9 2,486,900 sp30;5;2 0.0 3,703,125 10,8 4,102,477 sp50;8;2 0.0 4,941,372 14,0 5,632,101 sp80;8;2 0.0 7,285,340 9,0 7,941,365 sp100;8;2 0.0 9,002,588 23,7 11,139,247 sp100;10;2 0.0 7,621,409 14,4 8,720,741 sp120;12;3 0.0 8,370,264 24,5 10,422,348 sp150;15;4 0.0 8,405,831 15,8 9,730,512 sp200;15;4 0.0 11,518,202 14,1 13,137,920 378 M. Rohaninejad et al.

echelon is optimized and its results are fixed. According to the results of Table 4, the priority of the integrated approach to the hierarchical approach is evident. The average RPD criterion in this approach is 15.8% better than the hierarchical approach. 6 Conclusions We developed a new mixed-integer programming (MIP) model based on the scenariobased formulation for two-echelon reliable facility location problems.

However, the computational complexity of the scenario-based model made it less applicable for medium- and large-sized problems. Therefore, we were able to develop the use of this formulation for larger-sized problems by providing a Lagrangian dual decomposition algorithm.

The computational results showed that the proposed algorithm was an efficient method for the scenario-based formulation in medium- and large-scale problems that provided a high quality of solutions with reasonable running time and resilience to change the failure probabilities of facilities. Also, the computational results showed that the adoption of an integrated approach to make a decision and simultaneous optimization at all echelons are much more effective than hierarchical optimization.

Therefore, interaction and collaboration between owners of different echelons of the network are strongly recommended. Future studies can focus on developing exact solution methods to solve the problem. Also, in multi-echelon systems, different types of relationships between echelons can be studied. For example, the failure probability of a facility or the cost of providing demand from a facility depends on the planned level of reliability in the other echelons of the network.

For this reason, the lower reliability of the system in an echelon increases the costs of providing demand and the probability of failure in a lower echelon, and vice versa. It is also recommended to develop the implicit formulation for the problem with the aim of reduction in the complexity of the problem in future studies.

Acknowledgements The research has been supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports within the dedicated program ERC CZ under the project POSTMAN with reference LL1902. References Aboolian R, Cui T, Shen ZJM (2013) An efficient approach for solving reliable facility location models. INFORMS J Comput 25(4):720–729 Afify B, Ray S, Soeanu A, Awasthi A, Debbabi M, Allouche M (2019) Evolutionary learning algorithm for reliable facility location under disruption.

Expert Syst Appl 115:223–244 An S, Cui N, Bai Y, Xie W, Chen M, Ouyang Y (2015) Reliable emergency service facility location under facility disruption, en-route congestion and in-facility queuing. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev 82:199–216 Lagrangian Dual Decomposition for Two-Echelon Reliable … 379 Aydin N, Murat A (2013) A swarm intelligence based sample average approximation algorithm for the capacitated reliable facility location problem.

Int J Prod Econ 145(1):173–183 Berman O, Krass D, Menezes MB (2007) Facility reliability issues in network p-median problems: strategic centralization and co-location effects. Operat Res 55(2):332–350 Cui T, Ouyang Y, Shen ZJM (2010) Reliable facility location design under the risk of disruptions. Operat Res 58(4-part-1):998–1011 Fan H, Ma J, Li X (2018) A reliable location model for heterogeneous systems under partial capacity losses.

Transp Res Part C Emerg Technol 97:235–257 Fisher ML (2004) The Lagrangian relaxation method for solving integer programming problems. Manage Sci 50(12_supplement):1861–1871 Hatefi SM, Jolai F (2014) Robust and reliable forward–reverse logistics network design under demand uncertainty and facility disruptions. Appl Math Model 38(9–10):2630–2647 Li X, Ouyang Y (2010) A continuum approximation approach to reliable facility location design under correlated probabilistic disruptions.

Transp Res Part B Methodol 44(4):535–548 Li X, Ouyang Y, Peng F (2013a) A supporting station model for reliable infrastructure location design under interdependent disruptions. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev 60:80–93 Li Q, Zeng B, Savachkin A (2013b) Reliable facility location design under disruptions. Comput Oper Res 40(4):901–909 Peng P, Snyder LV, Lim A, Liu Z (2011) Reliable logistics networks design with facility disruptions.

Transp Res Part B Methodol 45(8):1190–1211 Razmi J, Zahedi-Anaraki A, Zakerinia M (2013) A bi-objective stochastic optimization model for reliable warehouse network redesign. Math Comput Model 58(11–12):1804–1813 Rohaninejad M, Navidi H, Nouri BV, Kamranrad R (2017) A new approach to cooperative competition in facility location problems: mathematical formulations and an approximation algorithm.

Comput Oper Res 83:45–53 Rohaninejad M, Amiri AH, Bashiri M (2015) Heuristic methods based on MINLP formulation for reliable capacitated facility location problems. Int J Indus Eng Prod Res 26(3):229–246 Rohaninejad M, Sahraeian R, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R (2018a) Multi-echelon supply chain design considering unreliable facilities with facility hardening possibility.

Appl Math Model 62:321–337 Rohaninejad M, Sahraeian R, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R (2018b) An accelerated Benders decomposition algorithm for reliable facility location problems in multi-echelon networks. Comput Ind Eng 124:523–534 Shen ZJM, Zhan RL, Zhang J (2011) The reliable facility location problem: Formulations, heuristics, and approximation algorithms. INFORMS J Comput 23(3):470–482 Snyder LV, Daskin MS (2005) Reliability models for facility location: the expected failure cost case.

Transp Sci 39(3):400–416 IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains Zied Bahroun, Mohamed Ben-Daya, and Elkafi Hassini Abstract With the increasing availability and use of internet of things (IoT) sensors and platforms in food supply chains, there is an interest in studying their efficiency and impact on supply chain operations.

To illustrate how classical operations management models could be affected by the introduction of IoT, we present an inventory model with deteriorating quality that can be monitored by IoT-enabled time–temperature indicator (TTI) sensors with application in the food supply chain. We develop a novel demand function that incorporates quality and its deterioration through three supply chain parties: producer, distributor and retailer.

We use the model to analyse the impact of IoT on the retailer and distributor in a Stackelber game context. Keywords Internet of things · Quality-controlled demand · Pricing · Food supply chain · Stackelber game 1 Introduction The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations and the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) estimate that cumulative food loss and waste accounts from up to 40% of the food produced (Gustavsson et al. 2011; Gunders 2012).

The food is lost throughout the supply chain, from production to storage, processing, distribution, retail and consumption (Muth et al. 2019).

Managing food loss and waste does not only contribute to the efficiency of the food supply chain, it also enhances the sustainability of the food supply chain by reducing the use Z. Bahroun · M. Ben-Daya Industrial Engineering, American University of Sharjah, Sharjah, UAE e-mail: zbahroun@aus.edu M. Ben-Daya e-mail: mbendaya@aus.edu E. Hassini (B) DeGroote School of Business, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4M4, Canada e-mail: hassini@mcmaster.ca © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_26 381 382 Z. Bahroun et al. of resources such as land, water and energy. Internet of things (IoT) is gradually being adopted in different functions of a supply chain to enhance its visibility and traceability capabilities.

In particular, IoT-enabled time–temperature indicator (TTI) sensors have been successfully adopted in the food supply chain (Ben-Daya et al. 2019). The use of TTIs allows for the possibility of quality-based control of supply chains (Bowman et al. 2009). This is giving rise to the area of quality-controlled supply chain management.

Despite the importance of managing food waste, we find that there is a scarcity of studies that looks at these issues in the Operations Management (OM) area (Ben-Daya et al. 2020). There is also a call for studying the impact of IoT on supply chain management by looking at the efficiency of using IoT sensors and how they can be incorporated in classical OM models.

As recent examples of studies, consider Leithner and Fikar (2019) who study the role of quality information in organic fresh food supply chains. The use simulation to study a supply chain of organic strawberries in Austria and study the impact of using quality data to decide about which distribution channel to use, e.g., direct sale, sale through a retailer or sale to a processing plant.

They find that the quality threshold and customer behavior are important parameters to consider in quality-controlled supply chain management. Another example study is that of Heising et al. (2017) where they look at the role of smart packaging in operationalizing quality-controlled logistics. They suggest that using dynamic expiry dates and pricing based on data from intelligent package sensors can substantially reduce food loss.

As an effort to contribute to the growing field of quality-controlled supply chain management, the goal of this paper is to introduce a model for studying the efficiency of IoT sensors and their impact on supply chain operations. To illustrate how classical OM models could be affected by the introduction of IoT, we present an inventory model with deteriorating quality that can be monitored by IoT-enabled time–temperature indicator (TTI) sensors with application in the food supply chain.

Our main contribution is the development of a novel demand function that incorporates quality and its deterioration through three supply chain parties: producer, distributor and retailer. We use the model to analyse the impact of IoT on the retailer and distributor. 2 Demand Model Consider a retailer that orders a produce and sells it at a fixed market price. To highlight the impact of IoT we consider two scenarios: (1) the retailer does not use TTIs and (2) the retailer makes use of TTIs.

2.1 Notation and Assumptions We use the following notation.

IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains t Time 383 i Supply chain entity,i ∈ 1(producer), 2(distributor), 3(retailer) qc Critical quality level below which a customer considers the product unsalable, qh Highest quality level beyond which a customer is indifferent to quality, 0 < qc < q h qi Quality at supply chain echelon i, qh ≤ q i ≤ 1 ti Product arrival time at supply chain echelon i μi Instantaneous quality deterioration rate at supply chain echelon i th Time at which customer starts recognizing different quality levels tc Time beyond which a customer finds the product unsalable due to bad quality d( p, q3 ) Demand function for a given price p and retailer initial quality D( p, q3 ) Total demand at as a function of price p and quality q3 ci Unit production/purchase cost/price at supply chain echelon i si Ordering cost per cycle at supply chain echelon i hi Inventory holding cost per unit per unit time at supply chain echelon i a Market size b Demand sensitivity to price β Demand sensitivity to quality,β ≤ b T Replenishment period, T = tc − t3 =(q3 − qc )/μ3 p Unit selling price πj Profit for distributor ( j = 2), retailer ( j = 3), and supply chain ( j = SC) In our model we focus on replenishment from a backroom storage.

It is therefore reasonable to make the following assumptions: (1) Lead times are negligible, and the replenishment is instantaneous. (2) At time zero all items are of perfect quality at echelon 1, the producer. (3) Product quality remains at a premium level until it reaches the retailer premises at time t 3 . (4) Shortages are not allowed.

(5) We assume a linear quality loss function (6) The retailer starts selling at time t 3 with quality level q3 (7) Demand decreases in price and increases in quality 2.2 Demand Function The quality deterioration process is illustrated in Fig. 1. At time t1 , the product quality level at the producer is q1 and deteriorates at a rate μ1 . By time t1 , the product reaches the distributor premises at a quality level q2 and start deteriorating at a rate μ2 .

By time t3 , the product reaches the retailer’s location at a quality level q3 where it deteriorates at a rate μ3 . At the retailers shelves, where the demand is satisfied, the product goes through three stages: (1) premium quality stage from time 384 Z. Bahroun et al. Fig. 1 Quality deterioration process. (Adapted from Ozbilge et al. 2019) t3 to th where the product quality is above qh indicating that it is of premium quality.

This period is referred to as apparent stability where the customer does not visibly see the changes in quality. (2) At time th the product quality becomes regular until time tc . During this visible changes period the customer can discern different quality levels. For example, a customer may use colour, firmness or texture of a fruit to assess its quality level.

(3) Finally, at time tc the product quality deteriorates to a level qc which makes it unacceptable to the customer and so the product goes to waste. During this process of quality deterioration we observe two types of quality: Effective quality, which represents the actual measurable quality levels, and visible quality that may be assessed on an ad hoc basis by a customer.

To model the demand function at the retailer, we assume that demand will depend on price, using the well know downward sloping demand curve a − bp, and quality. As per Fig. 1, the quality component will be fixed up to th and then linearly decreasing at a rate of μ3 with respect to time up to time tc .

Thus, starting at time t3 , the demand function at the retailer can be formulated as follows, for a given price p, quality q3 and time point t:  d( p, q3 ) = a − bp + βqh , t ≤ (q3 − qh )/μ3 a − bp + β(q 3 − μ3 t), t > (q3 − qh )/μ3 The first demand function corresponds to the time when the product has premium perceived quality, while the second function corresponds to the time when the product IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains 385 quality is perceived to be regular by the customers.

Noting that (q3 − qc )/μ3 = T, the total demand is.

 q −q /μ  q −q /μ    3 h 3 3 c 3 a − bp + β q3 − μ3 t a − bp + βqh dt +   q3 −qh /μ3 0 0           dt = a − bp + βqh q3 − qh /μ3 + a − bp + βq3 q3 − qc /μ3 − q3 − qh /μ3                 1 + βμ3 q3 − qh /μ3 2 − q3 − qc /μ3 2 = a − bp + βqh q3 − qh /μ3 + a − bp + βq3 qh − qc /μ3 2  1  + β 2q 3 − (q h + qc ) (q c − qh )/μ3 = A + Bp + γq3 + δpq3 2   D3 p, q3 =  T   d p.q3 dt = (1) Where   A = −(β qh2 + qc2 /2 + aqc )/μ3 (2) bqc μ3 (3) a + βqh μ3 (4) δ = −b/μ3 (5) B= γ = 2.3 Model Analysis In the following propositions we investigate the role of pricing and quality in the proposed demand model.

Proposition 1 (Retailer Threshold Quality) To ensure that there is demand at the retailer level, the retailer incoming quality threshold should be −Bp−A γ +δp Proof To ensure that demand is nonnegative at the retailer we require that D3 ( p, , q3 ) ≥ 0 and the results follows immediately.  We note that the threshold quality depends on the market size, demand sensitivity to quality and price, premium and critical perceived quality levels.

Interestingly, the threshold does not depend on the quality deterioration rate at the retailer.

Proposition 2 (Role of Price in Total Demand) The rate of change of total demand c) to price is − b(qμ3 −q 3 3) c) Proof From (1) we get that ∂ D(∂p,q = B + δq3 = − b(qμ3 −q . p 3 We note that the total demand sensitivity to price depends on the difference between the retailer’s incoming quality level, q3 , and the customers’ lowest acceptable perceived quality level, qc , in addition to the quality deterioration level at the 386 Z. Bahroun et al. retailer, μ3 .

In particular, demand sensitivity to prices increases when the customers are prepared to buy low quality levels. This is intuitive as a low value of qc indicates that customers are not too sensitive to quality. We also see that a retailer that chooses to start with low quality levels will cater to customers with low price sensitivity.

Proposition 3 (Role of Quality in Total Demand) The rate of change of total demand h to quality is a−bp+βq μ3 3) h Proof From (1) we have ∂ D(∂qp,q = γ + δp = a−bp+βq . μ3 3 Proposition 3 indicates that the total demand sensitivity to quality is proportional to the premium demand; as the demand from premium quality increases so does the sensitivity of demand to quality. In addition, the higher the level at which a customer discerns premium quality the more the demand is sensitive to quality.

Finally, if the price-only sensitive demand is high then the demand sensitivity to quality will also tend to be high. 3 Stackelberg Pricing Game In this section we assume that the retailer and distributor are independent supply chain entities. To analyse the retailer and supplier’s pricing decisions, we adopt a Stackelberg (2010) game approach. The retailer is the leader who determines price p, given their proximity to the customer.

The distributor is the follower who takes the price p and sets the wholesale price c3 accordingly. The retailer’s profit is. π3 ( p) = ( p − c3 )D( p, q3 ) = ( p − c3 )(a  + b p) (6) where  a = A + γq3  (7) b = B + δq3 (8)   π2 (c3 ) = (c3 − c2 )D p ∗ , q3 = (c3 − c2 )(a  + b p ∗ ) (9) The distributor’s profit is. where p ∗ is the optimal retailer’s profit obtained by maximizing π3 ( p). The following proposition establishes the optimal retail and wholesale prices.

Theorem 1 (Optimal Stackelberg Prices) The retailer’s optimal price is IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains 387   β qh2 + qc2 + 2aqc − 2q 3 (a + βqh ) c3 p = + 2 4b(qc − q3 ) ∗ and the distributor’s optimal wholesale price is  β qh2 + qc2 c2 c3∗ = + 2  + 2aqc − 2q 3 (a + βqh ) . 4b(qc − q3 ) Proof From (6) we have. ∂π3 ( p)   = a − b c3 + 2b p ∂p (10) and ∂ 2 π3 ( p) b(q3 − qc )  = 2b = B + δq3 = − < 0.

2 ∂p μ3 Therefore π3 ( p) is strictly concave in p and from (10) we deduce that. p∗ = a c3 −  2 2b (11) The result follows by substituting the values of a  and b using Eqs. (7–8) and (2–5). To find the optimal distributor’s wholesale price we first substitute (11) in (9) to obtain:   a b + c3 . π2 (c3 ) = (c3 − c2 ) 2 2 It follows that.   ∂π2 (c3 ) a − b c2 + b c3 = ∂c3 2 (12) and ∂ 2 π2 (c3 ) b(q3 − qc ) B + δq3  =− =b = < 0.

∂c3 2 2 2μ3 Therefore π3 ( p) is strictly concave in c3 and from (12) we deduce that. c3∗ = a c2 −  2 2b (13) 388 Z. Bahroun et al. The result follows by substituting the values of a  and b using Eqs. (7–8) and (2–5). We note that the optimal distributor and retailer prices do not depend on the quality deterioration rates. 4 Numerical Study In this section we conduct a numerical study to investigate the role of pricing, quality and IoT. We use the parameters in Table 1.

With the above values, we find that customers will start differentiating between the product quality levels at time th = (q 3 − q h )/μ3 = 90 h. The selling horizon is T = (q 3 − q c )/μ3 = 130 h. The distributor should set it wholesale price at $10.35 and the retailer would sell at prices of $12.03 resulting in a demand of 326.75 units. This results in profits of $547.52 and $1,095.03 for the distributor and retailer, respectively.

4.1 Demand Model: Role of Price and Quality Sensitivity Parameters An interesting question is how price and quality parameters interact in the demand model. To see the joint impact of price and quality sensitivity parameters on profit, we plot, in Fig. 2, total profit versus the ration of price and quality sensitivity parameters. To obtain this graph we set an initial price and quality sensitivity parameters of 0.1 and 0.5 respectively.

These are then increased by increments of 0.02 and 0.001, respectively. We observe that when βb ≥ 1 (vertical dashed line, in Fig. 2) the profit decreases at a faster rate when that ratio is increasing. This suggests that demand quality-sensitivity is more impactful, in terms of changes in profits. when the price sensitivity is more prominent.

This is an interesting observation, as it suggests that we should not ignore Table 1 Parameters for numerical study Parameter Value μ3 0.05/hour qh 0.4 q3 0.85 qc 0.2 a 20/hour b 1.5 β 1.5 c2 $7/unit IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains 389 Fig. 2 Profit versus ratio of price and quality sensitivity parameters the impact of quality in demand models even when the customers seem to be more cognizant of price changes.

4.2 Demand Model: Role of Consumer Quality Expectation Range One important feature of our demand model is that it explicitly includes a quality range qc , q h to represent the consumer quality expectations. In Fig. 3 we show how the total profits change with changes in the customer quality expectation range. To construct this graph we started with an initial indifference quality level qh of 0.7 and waste quality value of 0.2. The indifference quality os then decrease by increments of 0.005.

We can make two observation based on Fig. 3. First, the larger the customer quality expectation range, the higher the profit. This is intuitive as the wider the range the Fig. 3 Profit versus customer quality expectation range 390 Z. Bahroun et al. more the retailer will sell to the customers. Second, as the quality expectation interval becomes smaller, the profits decrease almost linearly (R2 = 0.9853).

4.3 Role of IoT To understand the role of IoT sensors in improving the supply chain profits, we look at three scenarios where IoT sensors are deployed at the distributor, retailer or both of them. 4.3.1 IoT Deployment at the Retailer Only The retailer investment in IoT sensors will impact the quality deterioration, μ3 , at its location.

For example, the deployment of sensors will alert the retailer to quality deterioration at individual fruits items so they can be taken out before they can cause the rest of the lot to deteriorate. In Fig. 4 we show how improving the quality deterioration rate, through investment in IoT sensors by the retailer, impacts the total profits. Note that the x-axis is plotted in reverse order to show the impact of improving μ3 .

We constructed this graph by taking an initial value of 0.001 for μ3 and then increasing it by increments of 0.0005. The total profits as a function of the deterioration rate changes according to a power function (R2 = 0.9955). This suggests that the impact of investing in IoT sensors is not significant up to a certain threshold, beyond which the marginal benefit of investments becomes significant.

In our numerical study, to improve total profits by more than 5% we need to invest in enough IoT sensors to bring the quality deterioration rate down to 0.0095 (vertical dashed line in the Fig. 4). Figure 4 can be used by the retailer to assess the worth of investing in IoT sensors. For example, if current quality deterioration rate is 0.01 and we want to improve it Fig.

4 Impact of IoT deployment by the retailer only IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains 391 to 0.007, i.e., a 30% improvement, then we can invest up to $1,173.25−$821.27 = $351.97 in sensors to break even. Note that the breakeven amount also represents the improvement in profits which account for 42.86% increase in profits.

Such graphs can be very useful in practice as practitioners have been struggling with the question of assessing the return of investment on IoT (Ben Day et al. 2019). 4.3.2 IoT Deployment at the Distributor Only The distributor investment in IoT sensors will impact the retailer’s initial quality level, q3 .

The deployment of sensors will allow the distributor to improve its quality control and remove any low-quality items to avoid further deterioration to the quantity that will be shipped to the retailer. In Fig. 5 we show how improving the initial retailer quality level, through investment in IoT sensors by the distributor, impacts the total profits. We constructed this graph by taking an initial value of 0.8 for q3 and then increasing it by increments of 0.003.

We observe that the total profits increase linearly with the increase of the retailer’s initial quality level (R2 ≈ 1). Thus, unlike the impact of IoT investment at the retailer, investments by the distributor have a monotonic increasing marginal benefit. Figure 5 can be used by the distributor to assess the worth of investing in IoT sensors.

For example, if current initial retailer’s quality level 0.8 and we want to improve it to 0.962, i.e., a 20.0% improvement, then we can invest up to $1928.17−$1,515.04 = $413.13 in sensors to break even. Note that the breakeven amount also represents the improvement in profits which account for 27.3% increase in profits. Fig. 5 Impact of IoT deployment by the distributor only 392 Z. Bahroun et al. Fig.

6 Impact of IoT deployment throughout the supply chain (distributor and retailer) 4.3.3 IoT Deployment Throughout the Supply Chain In this section we investigate the case when both the distributor and retailer invest in IoT sensors thus improving the retailer’s initial quality and the retailer’s quality deterioration rate at the same time. In Fig. 6 we show how the joint investment by the distributor and the retailer impacts the total profits.

We constructed this graph by taking an initial value of 0.8 and 0.0001 for q3 and μ3 , respectively, and then increasing them by increments of 0.001 and 0.003, respectively. Note that the x-axis has pairs of q3 and μ3 ordered in a decreasing order of the total profit. We observe that when the total profits as a function of the deterioration rate changes according to a power function (R2 = 0.9981). This suggests that the retailers return on investment in IoT sensors shadows that of the distributor.

Similar to the investment curve for the retailer, Fig. 6 also suggest that there is a threshold beyond which the marginal return on investment diminishes. 4.4 IoT Impact on Reducing Food Loss In Fig. 8, we show how demand changes depending on where IoT has been deployed. We note that in all cases the demand increase and therefore the food loss decreases. The behaviour of how demand change are similar to those of the changes of profits described in Sects. 4.3.1–4.3.3.

In particular, we also note that the benefit of IoT deployment has diminishing marginal benefits. i.e., there is a point beyond which additional investment in IoT do not lead to as much food waste reduction as the prior investment. IoT Quality-Controlled Demand Pricing Model in Food Supply Chains 393 (c) Retailer and distributor. Fig.

8 Impact of IoT deployment on food loss reduction 5 Conclusion In this paper we propose an inventory model with deteriorating quality that can be monitored by IoT-enabled time–temperature indicator (TTI) sensors with application in the food supply chain. We develop a novel demand function that incorporates quality and its deterioration through three supply chain parties: producer, distributor and retailer.

We use the model to analyse the impact of IoT on the retailer and distributor profits as well as food loss. We find that the retailer’s investment on IoT shadows that of the distributor. This suggest that in supply chains where the retailer and distributor may be considering investment in IoT as part of a contractual agreement then it would be better to delegate the investment to the retailer.

We also find that there is s threshold beyond which the retailer’s marginal return on investment in IoT diminishes. One practical implication of this finding is that it is not beneficial to invest in IoT sensors technology that may not significantly improve the quality deterioration at the retailer. Similar observations hold for IoT impact on food loss prevention. 394 Z. Bahroun et al.

Our paper can be extended in several ways, First, it is worth looking at how IoT investment may coordinate a decentralized supply chain, for example u incorporating a cost of ensuring quality at different supply chain entitities. Second, with IoT technology it would be possible for a retailer to have accurate quality levels at the visible changes period. In such circumstances it would be interesting to look at the impact of price discounts in avoiding food losses.

These two lines of research are currently being investigated by the authors of this paper. A third line of research is to incorporate uncertainty in quality and demand. Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge support from the American University of Sharjah Office of Research Enhanced Faculty Research Grant Award EFRG18-SCR-CEN-33 as well as the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada Discovery Grant RGPIN-2014-04827.

References Ben-Daya M, Hassini E, Bahroun Z (2019) Internet of things and supply chain management: a literature review. Int J Prod Res 57(15–16):4719–4742 Ben-Daya M, Hassini E, Bahroun Z, Banimfreg B (2020) The role of internet of things in food supply chain quality management: a review. Working paper Bowman P, Ng J, Harrison M, Lopez TS, Illic A (2009) Sensor based condition monitoring.

In: Building radio frequency identification for the global environment (Bridge) Euro RFID project Gunders D (2012) Wasted: how America is loosing up to 40 percent of its food from farm to fork to landfill. NRDC issue paper, August 2012 IP:12–06-B Gustavsson J, Cederberg C, Sonesson U, Van Otterdijk R, Meybeck A (2011) Global food losses and food waste. In: International congress SAVE FOOD!

Düsseldorf, Germany Heising JK, Claassen GDH, Dekker M (2017) Options for reducing food waste by quality-controlled logistics using intelligent packaging along the supply chain. Food Addit Contamin Part A 34(10):1672–1680 Leithner M, Fikar C (2019) A simulation model to investigate impacts of facilitating quality data within organic fresh food supply chains.

Annals Operat Res 1–22 Muth MK, Birney C, Cuéllar A, Finn SM, Freeman M, Galloway JN et al (2019) A systems approach to assessing environmental and economic effects of food loss and waste interventions in the United States. Sci Total Environ 685:1240–1254 Ozbilge A, Hassini E, Parlar M (2019) Donate more to earn more. Submitted for publication Von Stackelberg H (2010) Market structure and equilibrium.

Springer Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series for a Pharmaceutical Supply Chain with a Marketing Mix Strategy and Product Life Cycle Farzaneh S. Shakouhi, Reza Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, Armand Baboli, and Ali Bozorgi-Amiri Abstract Considering environmental protection and sustainable development, this study proposes a multi-objective mixed-integer nonlinear programming model for the pharmaceutical supply chain network design to maximize the profit, improve consumer health and minimize environmental pollution.

In this model, different scenarios are considered based on different product life cycle (PLC) stages (i.e., introduction, growth and maturity) based on marketing mixes (i.e., price, quality, place and promotion). Also, a fuzzy goal programming approach is used to solve the multi-objective problem with parameters of interval type 2 fuzzy numbers (IT2 FNs). A Taylor series is also used to linearize the health objective function.

The model presented for two real supply chains with the same product and alternative used in the pharmaceutical industry to demonstrate an application to support better decision making for sustainable supply chain management. The results of this research can be a reference for sustainable supply chain research and practical management.

Keywords Pharmaceutical chain · Network design · Sustainability · Product lifecycle · Marketing mix · Fuzzy programming F. S. Shakouhi (B) Department of Industrial Engineering, Albourz Campus, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran e-mail: f.shakouhi@ut.ac.ir R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam · A. Bozorgi-Amiri School of Industrial Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran e-mail: tavakoli@ut.ac.ir A. Bozorgi-Amiri e-mail: alibozorgi@ut.ac.ir A. Baboli LIRIS Laboratory, UMR 5205 CNRS, INSA of Lyon, 69621 Villeurbanne cedex, France e-mail: armand.baboli@insa-lyon.fr © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_27 395 396 F. S. Shakouhi et al. 1 Introduction Investigations into health services, especially the supply chain, are growing rapidly (Nematollahi et al. 2018). In September 2015, the United Nation General Assembly (Nematollahi et al. 2018) approved a new agendum: sustainable development for all.

Health is at the center of the 2030 Program as a sustainable development goal. Carter and Rogers (Carter and Rogers 2008) defined sustainability as “achieving the social, environmental, and economic goals of the organization by systematically coordinating essential inter-organizational processes to improve the long-term economic performance of the company and its supply chain”.

Considering the following goals at the same time, sustainability is an impartible part of the supply chain: Maximizing profits of the whole chain like other supply chains; many environmental laws are approved by the government to reduce environmental impacts and pollution; most governments, put pressure on stakeholders to increase the level of health and consumer satisfaction in the chain by applying appropriate laws.

Today, ensuring the sustaining design of any network of supply chain activities is dependent on maintaining and optimizing the use of the limited and non-replaceable resources (e.g., energy and environmental resources). This will lead to the adoption of strategies related to investment in improving the environmental performance of the supply chain, reducing pollutions, managing waste, recycling and reusing waste (Fahimi et al. 2017).

A sustainable supply chain is one of the aspects of designing and supplying the pharmaceutical supply chain network. To measure supply chain sustainability, some studies have examined all three concepts including 1) economic (maximizing the profit (Moradinasab et al. 2018; Mota et al. 2018) or minimizing the cost (Orjuela-Castro et al. 2019; Narayana et al. 2019; Sazvar et al. 2018; Allaoui et al. 2018; Ghaderi et al. 2018; Tsao et al. 2018; Eskandari-Khanghahi et al. 2018; Baboli et al.

2011)), 2) environmental (Moradinasab et al. 2018; Mota et al. 2018; Orjuela-Castro et al. 2019; Narayana et al. 2019; Sazvar et al. 2018; Allaoui et al. 2018; Ghaderi et al. 2018; Tsao et al. 2018; Eskandari-Khanghahi et al. 2018), and 3) social (maximizing the number of jobs created (Moradinasab et al. 2018; Mota et al. 2018; Allaoui et al. 2018; Eskandari-Khanghahi et al. 2018), food security and consumer health (Orjuela-Castro et al. 2019; Narayana et al.

2019), efficiency of the supply chain (Allaoui et al. 2018), social benefits earned from establishing facilities (Ghaderi et al. 2018; Tsao et al. 2018), satisfaction of social responsibility (Roshan et al. 2019), and unmet demand (Roshan et al. 2019; Zahiri et al. 2018)) factors. Insufficient knowledge of market parameters and competitor reaction causes a kind of uncertainty in decision making that is seen in models. Khalilpourazari et al. (2019) and Babaee Tirkolaee et al.

(2019) used triangular fuzzy numbers for demand parameters. To fill the gap, for the first time, all the three aspects of sustainability including economic, social and environmental have been considered in PSC as a multi-objective model and fuzzy theory (fuzzy goal programming based on Taylor series) used to solve it. In this research, two pharmaceutical supply chains are considered for their Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series … 397 different stages of the product life cycle (PLC).

Innovations of this research are: using marketing strategies considering the PLC stages (product introduction, growth and maturity periods); sustainable supply chain network design (SCND) depending on marketing mixes (price, quality, place and promotion); insufficient knowledge of market parameters and competitor reaction causes a kind of uncertainty in decision making that is seen in the objective function with parameters of trapezoidal interval type-2 fuzzy numbers (IT2 FNs); using Taylor series for linearizing, the nonlinear objective functions of consumer health level; considering trapezoidal IT2 FNs disturbances in a supply chain (i.e., disturbances in producer, distributor and retailer).

As for solving the uncertain problem, Dalman (Dalman 2018) presented an interactive fuzzy goal programming approach based on Taylor series to achieve the highest degree of membership function for multi-objective nonlinear programming problems with trapezoidal IT2 FNs. Because of these advantages, the fuzzy goal programming based on Taylor series is utilized for solving the multi-objective nonlinear programming problem with IT2 FNs in this study.

2 Model Formulation 2.1 Problem Definition This research involves two pharmaceutical supply chains and three actors. Supply chains are assumed to each has one manufacturer, distributors and retailers. The pharmaceutical supply chain is considered at all stages of product such as introduction, growth and maturity.

The SCND is based on three objective functions, maximizing the profit, minimizing pollution emission, and maximizing consumer health increase (number of product complaints according to product quality). The decision variables at this level are the amount of production, choosing distribution centers, and the amount of sent products from a manufacturer to a distributor and from a distributor to a retailer.

It should be noted that at this stage, the issues of a producer, a distributor and retailer disruption are considered in the network design. So, the supply chain presented in issue is multi-objective, multi-echelon, which are depended to the objective functions marketing mix factors (i.e., price, quality, place and promotion). The assumptions assumed in the problem are as follows: • Different stages of the PLC is considered for the supply chain.

• Supply chain and demand depend on the marketing mix. • There are disruptions and capacity limitation of manufacturing centers, distribution centers, and retailor centers. • Candidate locations for distribution centers are identified. 398 F. S. Shakouhi et al.

2.2 Model Description Indices: T cc jr Transportation cost per unit of distance from a distribution j to a retailer r i Product index (i = 1, …, I) ec Cost per unit of CO2 emissions x Set of manufacturers (x = 1, …, X) pi Price of no-name product i j Set of distributors (j = 1, …, J) ηqi Amount of CO2 produced in the production process depends on the quality level of the product r Set of retailers (r = 1, …, R) ψi Amount of CO2 emissions in the product i production process ti x j Amount of CO2 emissions in the transship process from a manufacture x to a distribution j Parameters: pi Product price i ti jr Amount of CO2 emissions in the transship process from a distribution j to a retailer r Di Product demand i σxi Cost of eliminating or reducing the negative side effects of product I production by a manufacture x m qi Product quality level I δj Efficiency coefficient for distributor j m si Product access level i ω̃i x Percentage of product I disturbance at the manufacturing center x m ai Product promotion level i  ωi j Percentage of product i disturbance at the distribution center j fj Fixed costs for opening distribution j εqi Variable cost of product quality i capi x Maximum production capacity of product i at the manufacturing center x εsi Variable cost of product access i capi j Maximum storage capacity of product i at the distribution center j εai Variable cost of product promotion i φqi Fixed cost of product quality i B φai Fixed cost of product promotion i Decision variables: Disx j Distance from manufacture x to distribution j zj 1 if the distributor j is selected; 0, otherwise Diss jr Distance from distribution j to retailer r qi x j Quantity of product i shipped from manufacture x to distribution j   ωir  capir Percentage of product i disturbance at the retailer center r Maximum storage capacity of product i at the retailer center r Supply chain management budget (continued) Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series … 399 (continued) T cx j Transportation cost per unit of distance from manufacture x to distribution j qi jr Quantity of product i shipped from distribution j to retailer r 2.3 Objective Functions Max Z 1 =  pi qi x j − i∈I,x∈X, j∈J    fjzj− j∈J (ε̃qi m qi + ε̃si m si + ε̃ai m ai )qi x j − i∈I,x∈X, j∈J  2 (φ̃qi m qi + φ̃si m 2si + φ̃ai m ai2 )qi x j − i∈I,x∈X, j∈J Disx j T cx j qi x j − i∈I,x∈X, j∈J  ⎛ Min Z 2 = ec ⎝ Diss jr T cc jr qir j i∈I,r ∈R, j∈J  ⎞  (η̃qi m qi + ψ̃i + t˜i x j )qi x j + (1) t˜ i jr qi jr ⎠+ i∈I,r ∈R, j∈J i∈I,x∈X, j∈J +  σ̃xi qi x j (2) i∈I,x∈X, j∈J Min Z 3 =  (1 − θ̃xi )m qi qi x j i∈I,x∈X, j∈J (3) The first objective represents the obtained profit using the difference in income and expense The first part shows the revenue from product manufacturing, Part 2 shows the cost of distribution opening, Part 3 and 4, respectively show variable and fixed cost of product based on quality, access and promotion done by supply chain and part five shows the transportation cost from a manufacturer to a distributor and part six shows the transportation cost from a distributor to retailer.

In this section, quality, access and promotion cost parameters are IT2 FNs. The second objective represents the created pollution throughout the supply chain.

The first part shows the total amount of pollutants released in the production process commensurate with the quality level plus the amount of pollutants released in the process of transportation from a manufacturer to a distributor, the second part represents the amount of pollutants released in the process of transportation from a distributor to a retailer and the second part is negative side effects decreasing cost of the production (e.g., the cost of removing industrial wastewater in production).

In this objective function, the amount of CO2 emission parameters are IT2 FNs. The third objective function represents the level of consumer health. The level of consumer health depends on a sensitive coefficient to the level of complaint of product quality and provided quality, in which manufacturer x and coefficient sensitive to the rate of complaint of product quality.θ̃x is considered as an 400 F. S. Shakouhi et al.

IT2 FN according to the number of complaints made in the previous periods from the manufacturer x.

2.4 Constraints  qi jr ≤ r ∈R   qi x j ∀i ∈ I, j ∈ J (4) x∈X qi x j ≤ ω̃i x capi x ∀i ∈ I, x ∈ X (5) j∈J  qi jr ≤ Di ∀i ∈ I (6) ∀i ∈ I, j ∈ J (7) j∈J,r ∈R  qi x j ≤ ω̃ i j capi j z j x∈X  qir j ≤  ωir capir ∀i ∈ I, r ∈ R (8) j∈J  fjzj ≤ B (9) j∈J qi x j ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ I, x ∈ X, j ∈ J (10) qi jr ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ I, j ∈ J, r ∈ R (11) z j ∈ {0, 1} ∀j ∈ J (12) Equation (4) guarantees the product current balance from a manufacture to a retailer.

Equation (5) considers the disturbances in the production process. That means, with the numerating disturbances, the quantity of produced and transported products to the distributor must not exceed the maximum production capacity. Equation (6) guarantees that the product transported to the retailer is less than or equal to customer demand so that the retailer does not face unsold volume due to lack of space. Equation (7) considers the disturbances in the distributor.

That means, with numerating the disturbances, the quantity of produced and transported products to the distributor is not more than the maximum storage capacity of the distributor. Equation (8) considers disturbances in the retailer. That means, with numerating the disturbances, the quantity of transported products to the retailer should not exceed the maximum storage capacity of the retailer.

Equation (9) states that the select and opening cost of distribution locations should be less than the available budget. The Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series … 401 considered disturbances are considered as IT2 FNs. Constraints (10)–(12) define the ranges for all the variables. 3 Methodology According to Hu et al.

(2013), a trapezoidal IT2 FN is defined that the upper and the lower membership functions are both trapezoidal fuzzy numbers, i.e., ) = (ā1 , ā2 , ā3 , ā4 ; H1 ( Ā); H2 ( Ā)), (a , a , a , a ; H1 (A ); H2 (A )) A = ( Ā, A − − − −1 −2 −3 −4 (13) where Hi (A ) and Hi ( Ā) denote membership values of the corresponding elements − a and ā i+1 , respectively.

The expected value of A is determined as follows: − i+1  4  2 1 1 1  E(A) = (āi + a− ) × (Hi ( Āi ) + Hi (A )) − 2 4 i=1 4 i=1 i i (14) According to the linearization approach proposed by Dalman (2018), transform nonlinear membership functions by using the Taylor series approach around the x1∗ ,  x2∗ , . . .

,  xn∗ , which is the solution that is employed to maximize solution  x∗ =  the k-th nonlinear membership function μk ( f k (x)) associated with kth nonlinear objective f k (x):  μk f k  x1∗  x1∗ μk f k  x1∗ + x1∗ x1 −  ⎢  ∂ x1 ∂ x2 ⎢ μk ( f k (x))k=1,2,...,1 ∼ =⎢ ⎢  ∗ ⎣ μk f k  x1  + xn∗ x1∗ xn −  ∂kn ⎡  ⎤   x2∗ + . .

.⎥  × x2 −   ∗ ⎥  x1 ⎥ ⎥ ⎦ In multi-objective programming, if an imprecise aspiration level is injected to each of the objectives, then these fuzzy objectives are expressed as fuzzy goals. ˜ k . Its membership function can be defined Now, consider the k-th fuzzy goal f k (x)>s by: 402 F. S. Shakouhi et al.

⎧ 1 f k (x) ≥ sk ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎨ f k (x) − lk l ≤ f (x) ≤ s k k k ∼ sk − l k μk ( f k (x)) = ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ 0 f k (x) ≤ lk ⎪ ⎪ ⎩ (15) Then, an equivalent linear fuzzy goal programming model for problem (15) can be developed as follows: ⎧ μk ( f k (x)) + dk = 1, k = 1, 2, . . . , l ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ k = 1, 2, . . . l ⎨ β ≥ dk Min β xl ≤ xl ≤ xl l = 1, 2, . . . , n ⎪ ⎪ ⎪ d ≥ 0 k = 1, 2, . . .

, l ⎪ k ⎩ 0≤β≤1 (16) where x− ≤ xl ≤ x̄l denotes that the limits of decision variables derived from the l individual optimal solutions of each objective and dk− ≥ 0 represents the negative deviations from the aspired levels. 4 Illustrative Example 4.1 Example Description A real case of two pharmaceutical supply chains is presented to illustrate the application of the proposed model to support better decision making for sustainable supply chain management.

The study assumes that each supply chain has one manufacture, three distributors, and three retailers. Also, the supply chains products are similar to each other in the market. 4.2 Parameters Settings Company information has been modified for business confidentiality. The parameter data are shown in Table 1. This table provides data on two pharmaceutical supply chains with the same product over different periods of their PLC stages.

Naturally, the marketing mix data is sensitive to the competitor’s strategy and changes according to the competitor’s PLC stages.

The fixed cost for establishing 400, 500 and 300 Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series … 403 Table 1 Distribution centers and retailers data Distributors First Second Third Retailer distributor distributor distributor First Second retailer retailer Third retailer 3/0.5 Dis1 j /T c1 j 5/1 5/1 4/0.5 Diss1r /T cc1r 1/0.1 E(t˜11 j ) 0.5 0.1 0.1 Diss2r /T cc2r 1.5/0.6 2.5/0.55 3.5/0.5 2/0.15 E(ω̃ 1 j ) 0.03 0.02 0.01 Diss3r /T cc3r 0.5/0.5 1.5/0.45 2/0.5 cap1 j 9800 10000 11000 E(t˜ 11r ) 5 5 5 E(t˜ 12r ) E(t˜ 13r ) 10 10 10 1 1 1  ) E( ω1r 0.03 0.02 0.01  cap1r 400 450 500 unit distribution centers and the variable costs dependent on quality, access and promotion are respectively equal to 1, 2 and 4.

The fixed costs dependent on the quality, place, and the promotion are 2, 3 and 1, respectively. The amount of CO2 released in the production process is 6 and the amount of CO2 released based on the quality level is 1. The producer side costs are 1 and manufacture disturbances are 0.05. The manufacturer capacity is 1000. 5 Results GAMS 22.2 software was employed to solve the proposed model using the test case data.

The results of the calculation of the objective functions in two supply chains at different PLC stages are shown in Table 2. As observed in Table 2, the profit of the second supply chain diminishes with the increased lifecycle of the first supply chain product. This is natural because, with an increase in the lifecycle of the competitor supply chain product (second), the power of the competitor increases in the market, and the share of the market grows for the competitor.

In this way, the profit of the first supply chain diminishes. The notable point in Table 2, is that the profit of the introduction period of the first supply chain product is less than that of the product growth period, and the growth period profit is less than maturity period profit of the product. The reason is that based on the lifecycle of the product, with an increase in the PLC (from introduction to maturity), the profit acquired from product sales grows.

Introduction 40/67 22/36 13/11 23/39 458/250 1053 357304 0.0467 5407 588338 0.1356 PLC (SC2) Price (SC1)/(SC2) Quality (SC1)/(SC2) Access (SC1)/(SC2) Promotions (SC1)/(SC2) Demand (SC1)/(SC2) F1 (SC1) F2 (SC1) F3 (SC1) F1 (SC2) F2 (SC2) F3 (SC2) 0.1329 596211 4479 0.0465 289996 1088 453/254 22/43 13/11 22/36 40/64 Growth Introduction SC1: First supply chain, SC2: Second supply chain Introduction PLC (SC1) 0.1355 649892 3515 0.0462 196911 1116 448/264 22/44 13/10 22/38 40/59 Maturity Introduction Table 2 PLC and the data of the objective functions for first supply chain 0.1357 589054 5419 0.0464 358020 1084 455/250 23/39 13/11 22/36 41/67 Introduction Growth 0.1325 600506 4549 0.0462 355872 1121 451/255 23/43 13/11 22/36 41/64 Growth Growth 0.1356 635577 3515 0.046 293576 1144 446/264 23/44 13/10 22/38 41/59 Maturity Growth 0.1353 591917 5489 0.0461 358020 1113 453/251 23/39 13/11 22/36 42/67 Introduction Maturity 0.1326 599074 4549 0.0458 358020 1154 449/255 23/43 13/11 22/36 42/64 Growth Maturity 0.1357 650608 3527 0.0456 356946 1179 443/264 23/44 13/10 22/38 42/59 Maturity Maturity 404 F. S. Shakouhi et al.

Fuzzy Goal Programming Based on a Taylor Series … 405 6 Conclusions This study presented a multi-objective model for two sustainable pharmaceutical supply chains, which simultaneously considered economic, environmental, social, and uncertain parameters to maximize profit and consumer health and minimize pollution emissions. A fuzzy goal programming approach was used to solve the multiobjective model with parameters of IT2 FNs.

The consumer health objective function was also linearized using the Taylor series. In this method, the objective functions became one objective function applied to two pharmaceutical supply chains with the same product in the market. Different scenarios for the supply chains were considered based on their PLC stages. The marketing mix was also examined proportional with supply chains marketing strategies at different periods of their PLC stages.

For the future study, two avenues are considered: (1) replacing the Taylor series approach by other techniques for eliminating the nonlinear terms in the model, (2) replacing the IT2 FNs by type-1 fuzzy parameters and can be compared with the results of this paper. References Allaoui H, Guo Y, Choudhary A, Bloemhof J (2018) Sustainable agro-food supply chain design using two-stage hybrid multi-objective decision-making approach.

Comput Oper Res 89:369–384 Babaee Tirkolaee E, Goli A, Weber G (2019) Multi-objective aggregate production planning model considering overtime and outsourcing options under fuzzy seasonal demand. In: 2019 Manufacturing, Poznan, Poland, 19–22 May 2019 Baboli A, Fondrevelle J, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R, Mehrabi A (2011) A replenishment policy based on joint optimization in a downstream pharmaceutical supply chain: centralized vs. decentralized replenishment.

Int J Adv Manuf Technol 57(1–4):367–378 Carter CR, Rogers DS (2008) Sustainable supply chain management: toward new theory in logistics management. Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manage 38(5):360–387 Dalman H (2018) Interactive fuzzy goal programming based on Taylor series to solve multiobjective nonlinear programming problems with interval type 2 fuzzy numbers.

IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst 26:2434–2449 Eskandari-Khanghahi M, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R, Taleizadeh AA, Hassanzadeh Amin S (2018) Designing and optimizing a sustainable supply chain network for a blood platelet bank under uncertainty. Eng Appl Artif Intell 71:236–250 Fahimi K, Seyedhosseini SM, Makui A (2017) Simultaneous competitive supply chain network design with continuous attractiveness variables.

Comput Ind Eng 107:235–250 Ghaderi H, Moini A, Pishvaee MS (2018) A multi-objective robust possibilistic programming approach to sustainable switchgrass-based bioethanol supply chain network design. J Clean Prod 179:368–406 Hu J, Zhang Y, Chen X, Liu Y (2013) Multi-criteria decision making method based on possibility degree of interval type-2 fuzzy number.

Knowl-Based Syst 43:21–29 Khalilpourazari S, Mirzazadeh A, Weber G-W, Pasandideh SHR (2019) A robust fuzzy approach for constrained multi-product economic production quantity with imperfect items and rework process. Optimization, 1–28 406 F. S. Shakouhi et al. Moradinasab N, Amin-Naseri MR, Jafari Behbahani T, Jafarzadeh H (2018) Competition and cooperation between supply chains in multiobjective petroleum green supply chain: A game theoretic approach.

J Clean Prod 170:818–841 Mota B, Gomes MI, Carvalho A, Barbosa-Povoa AP (2018) Sustainable supply chains: An integrated modeling approach under uncertainty. Omega 77:32–57 Narayana SA, Pati RK, Padhi SS (2019) Market dynamics and reverse logistics for sustainability in the Indian pharmaceuticals industry.

J Clean Prod 208:968–987 Nematollahi MR, Hosseini-Motlagh SM, Ignatius J, Goh M, Saghafi Nia M (2018) Coordinating a socially responsible pharmaceutical supply chain under periodic review replenishment policies. J Clean Prod 172:2876–2891 Orjuela-Castro JA, Aranda-Pinilla JA, Moreno-Mantillac CE (2019) Identifying trade-offs between sustainability dimensions in the supply chain of biodiesel in Colombia.

Comput Electron Agric 161:162–169 Roshan M, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R, Rahimi Y (2019) A two-stage approach to agile pharmaceutical supply chain management with product substitutability in crises. Comput Chem Eng 127:200–217 Sazvar Z, Rahmani M, Govindan K (2018) A sustainable supply chain for organic, conventional agro-food products: The role of demand substitution, climate change and public health.

J Clean Prod 194:564–583 Tsao Y-C, Thanh V-V, Lu J-C, Yu V (2018) Designing sustainable supply chain networks under uncertain environments: Fuzzy multi-objective programming. J Clean Prod 174:1550–1565 Zahiri B, Jula P, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R (2018) Design of a pharmaceutical supply chain network under uncertainty considering perishability and substitutability of products.

Inf Sci 423:257–283 Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting and Post-harvest Operations Thanaphorn Sornprom, Voratas Kachitvichyanukul, and Kanokporn Kungwalsong Abstract This article analyses resource flexibilities and consequences of one disruption on an agricultural supply chain through a mixed-integer programming model. The disruption considered is inflation.

This situation leads to high living costs, high demand, an increase in employment level, and a rise in production level. The decisions on harvest planning, harvesting equipment selection, hauling truck assignment, and product and processor assignments are simultaneously determined with the objectives to maximize profit and minimize lost sales cost. A set of non-dominated solutions is obtained for decision-makers to evaluate possible solutions for trade-offs between profit and lost sales.

Evaluations of these trade-offs may have policy implications on resource allocation decisions. The purpose of this chapter is to assess the consequences of inflation on the key decisions in the integrated planning of an agricultural supply chain with selective harvesting. This chapter identifies the causes and effects of inflation at an operational level. The findings underscore the model’s recommended decisions in an agricultural supply chain disruption.

In this study, the authors analyse one disruption related to demand, available capacities, costs, and yields through a mixed-integer programming model. Numerical data sets for this disruption are derived based on real operations. CPLEX Optimization software package is used to find the possible solutions for both single and multi-objective problems.

Keywords Resilience · Integrated planning · Risk analysis · Supply chain disruptions T. Sornprom (B) Faculty of Logistics, Burapha University, Saen Suk, Thailand e-mail: thanaphorn.prae@gmail.com V. Kachitvichyanukul Asian Institute of Technology, Khlong Nueng, Thailand e-mail: voratas@ait.ac.th K. Kungwalsong Graduate School of Management and Innovation, King Mongkut’s University of Technology Thonburi, Thonburi, Thailand e-mail: kanokporn.rie@gmail.com © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al.

(eds. ), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_28 407 408 T. Sornprom et al. 1 Introduction Agricultural production is one of the principal revenue sources for many countries. The supply chain of agricultural production may take months or years and may cover a broad geographical area.

The occurrences of unplanned events such as natural disasters, equipment failure, and unpredictable customers’ demand may adversely affect the performance of a supply chain. In recent years, fierce competition in agricultural business leads to the awareness of the necessity of flexibility and adaptability in a supply chain to minimize risk. To reduce the impacts and severities of the supply chain risks, risk management and resilience assessment should be applied.

Additionally, it is desirable to consider flexibility and adaptability in the design of a supply chain management system. Supply chain resilience is often seen as the capacity to maintain a normal operation when disruptions occur. It directly relates to disaster recovery, risk management, and reduction of the supply chain vulnerability. Many researchers (Elleuch et al. 2016a; Hosseini et al. 2019; Kamalahmadi and Parast 2016; Ponomarov and Holcomb 2009; Singh et al.

2019) reviewed the literature related to the supply chain resilience and vulnerability. They (Kamalahmadi and Parast 2016; Ali et al. 2017) claimed that the supply chain resilience should cover three phases. Firstly, emergency plans should be prepared for urgencies. Secondly, the supply chain should be robust to deal with the disruptions (Tang 2006). Finally, effective responses need to minimize the negative impacts of supply chain disruptions.

Besides, resilience analysis has been applied in multiple kinds of supply chains such as energy (Jabbarzadeh et al. 2016; Urciuoli et al. 2014), dairy products (Bourlakis et al. 2014), fruits (Behzadi et al. 2017), food (Behzadi et al. 2017), meat (Leat and Revoredo-Giha 2013), and automobiles (Carvalho et al. 2012; Rezapour et al. 2017). Decision-making problems under uncertainty have been implemented with stochastic programming, robust programming, and simulation (Borodin et al. 2016).

Several solution techniques have been applied to improve resilience such as optimization models (Dixit et al. 2016; Septiani et al. 2016), mixed-integer linear programming model (Yavari and Zaker 2019; Goli et al. 2019), simulation (Carvalho et al. 2012), quality function deployment (QFD) (Elleuch et al. 2016b), questionnaire survey (Bourlakis et al. 2014), and interview (Leat and Revoredo-Giha 2013). Agricultural supply chain risk management has been a topic of interest in the last two decades.

The food supply chain with strategic resilience was built by Manning and Soon (Manning and Soon 2016). They proposed the strategic resilience indicator framework to develop organizations by considering in 3Rs: ready, respond, and recovery. Septiani and et al. (2016) found that most of the research works related to resilient supply chain were done in three perspectives: risk identification, risk assessment, and risk mitigation.

First, risk identification can be conducted by qualitative method, semi-qualitative method, and quantitative method. Second, risk assessment can be done through various models such as simulation model, intelligent technique, Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … 409 optimization model, statistical analysis, and others. Last, Interpretative Structural Modelling (ISM) and life cycle assessment can be applied for risk mitigation.

Some studies applied optimization techniques to manage the agricultural supply chain under risk. In 2000, the complexity of selecting effective crops pattern and maximizing farmers’ utility led to the notion of a conceptual framework (Romero 2000) which was implemented as a multi-objective linear programming model. A weighting method was applied to find the solutions for the multi-objective problems which attempted to maximize an expected gross margin, and to minimize variability.

Through experiments, the authors found that the proposed framework can be an alternative method to deal with risk instead of the mathematical model based on portfolio theory (Freund 1956). For the influence of weather in agricultural management, a crop planning model with stochastic values was proposed as a linear programming problem (Itoh et al. 2003). The model focused on the limitation of land, and labor. The purpose was to maximize the minimum total gain due to random profit coefficients.

The experiments used the planning data of various crops; carrot, radish, cabbage, and Chinese cabbage within ten acres. The results showed that an optimal solution can be applied in real situations. The uncertainties of supply and demand in the supply chain of perishable products have challenged decision-makers to develop optimization models.

A mixed-integer linear programming model and Monte Carlo simulation model were applied to incorporate demand, yield, and harvest failure of tomatoes plantation (Merrill 2007). The objectives of this study were to find the appropriate time, quantity, and location to plant tomatoes to minimize customer service requirements and to maximize profit. Numerical experiments showed that the model can achieve a 90% customer service level with 20% less planted acreages with almost three times profit growth.

Another work that was related to tomato planting was done in 2012. Tan and Comden (2012) applied a non-linear equation to determine farm areas and seeding times to maximize the total profit over the planning period. The detailed model considered maturation time, harvest time, and yield uncertainty with random demand. The numerical experiments showed that the objective function increased exponentially with the number of farms in a single-period.

For the multi-period problem, the approach with farm areas and the seeding times had approximately 16% higher profit than the mean-value approach. In 2017, a two-stage stochastic model was developed to maximize the expected profit of the Kiwifruit supply chain in New Zealand (Behzadi et al. 2017). A fractional formulation was used to integrate perishability and a quality barrier into the model.

This study investigated the effectiveness of robust, and resilient strategies to manage harvest time and yield disruptions. After the model was applied, the results showed the improvement of the company’s benefits; however, the authors considered only two types of suppliers’ risks: harvest time disruption and yield disruption. In the same period, some scholars designed an integrated supply chain network for perishable products (Shrivastava et al. 2017).

The researchers considered disruptions in the transportation links between manufacturers and retailers. They formulated the problem of locating and allocating facilities as a mixed-integer quadratic model. 410 T. Sornprom et al. The model was solved by the default settings of the CPLEX optimization software. Consequently, the total cost of the supply chain was higher in the resilient model. In the future, multi-products (Goli et al. 2019), multi-routes, and multi-periods should be considered.

As mentioned earlier, there was no attempted to address resilience through the assessments of capabilities, costs, and impacts and considering multi-objective optimizations (Elleuch et al. 2016a; Hosseini et al. 2019; Kamalahmadi and Parast 2016). Therefore, this study focuses on a modeling framework to examine the consequences of inflation on suppliers, operations, capacities, time availabilities, costs, resources, and demands.

Two objective functions, profit maximization, and lost sales cost minimization and five decisions of inflation will be compared with those results obtained in a normal condition. Lastly, two scenarios will be evaluated while simultaneously considering both objective functions. The set of non-dominated solution values or the Pareto frontier will be obtained for decision-makers.

2 Methodology Ahumada and Villalobos (2009) reviewed the literature on agricultural supply chain and found that many research works have been concentrated on developing tactical plans for the supply chain of non-perishable products.

Only several researchers have worked on developing operational plans for agricultural supply chain for fresh produces and most of the studies have separately considered four functional areas: production, harvest, storage, and distribution, and the plans for each functional area were made sequentially. The modeling approaches used in agricultural planning included stochastic programming (SP), linear programming (LP), dynamic programming (DP), and mixed-integer programming (MIP).

Common objective functions were cost minimization and profit maximization. Nevertheless, most of the prior researchers did not pay much attention to risk modeling, uncertain information, logistic integration, quality, and security of products. Besides, planning models have been developed for each functional area with very little attempt made on integration due to the complexity of the model.

The focus of this study is to assess the impacts of inflation on the key decisions in the integrated planning of an agricultural supply chain with selective harvesting. The integrated planning model that includes harvesting, hauling, production, transport, and distribution for selective harvesting by Sornprom et al. (2019) is used for risk analysis of the agricultural supply chain.

It is a mixed-integer model that considers resource allocation such as time availabilities, resource capacities, and the number of haulers, vehicles, and harvesting tools. The key decisions include the quantities of harvested crops, hauled crops, finished products, delivered products, products sold, and product shortage. A mathematical model and detailed description can be found in the reference (Sornprom et al. 2019).

The development of a framework for a resilience analysis along with a solution technique is given in the next subsection. Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … 411 2.1 Framework Development The chronological sequence of decisions in an agricultural supply chain is shown in Fig. 1. The arrow indicates the dependency of decisions from previous operations. For instance, a drought may result in the decrease of mature crop quantities to be harvested.

Consequently, this may lead to less requirement for hauling equipment and fewer raw material available for production and eventually a reduction in products delivered to the distribution center. The disruption considered in this study is inflation. The disruptions caused by this risk factor on various decisions in an integrated supply chain are illustrated in Fig. 2. According to Fig.

2, it is apparent that inflation affects the value of money, leading to an increasing amount of wages to maintain living costs. In this economic variation, banks reduce interest so that many companies offer more jobs. As a consequence, individuals in society have money for basic needs, resulting in the rising demand for agriculture products. When the demand is higher than supply, companies raise the prices of products.

A resilience analysis of this situation is carried out using the mixed-integer programming model. The data is a subset of a real system with the size reduced for suitable computational complexity. A baseline case and the two scenarios described above are evaluated and compared. The supply chain system considered contains 20 fields from 4 suppliers. The system is operated with three harvesting machines, five haulers, four processors, Fig. 1 Dependency of decisions in an agricultural supply chain Fig.

2 Cause and effect framework 412 T. Sornprom et al. three products, and three vehicles. All the fields are near and can use the assigned machines without much transportation delay. 2.2 Solution Technique CPLEX optimization software package is a well-established solver for singleobjective mixed integer programming problems. This software uses a branch and bound method in seeking optimal solutions.

To solve the multi-objective problem directly with CPLEX, one objective must be converted into a constraint as shown in Eqs. (2) and (4). From these equations, it clearly shows that the objective values from profit maximization and lost sales cost minimization acts as the bounds of possible multi-objective values and Pareto frontier.

The “deviation” variables Δ and ξ are treated as parameters and the model is solved repeatedly with varying values of Δ and ξ to yield a set of non-dominated solutions.

Objective function : Max Pr o f it = Revenue − T otal dir ect cost (1) Constraint : Lost sales cost ≤ Minimal lost sales cost +  (2) Objective function: Minimize Lost sales cost =    p  J pd ∗ σ p d J pd : Shortage quantity of product p on day d (box) σ p : Lost sales cost of product p (baht per box per day) Constraint : Pr o f it ≥ Maximal pr o f it −ζ (3) (4) 3 Results and Analysis As mentioned earlier, this study concentrates on a possible risk called inflation.

This situation will be compared with the normal one to study the consequential impacts on decisions, profit, and lost sales cost. The math model proposed by Sornprom et al. (2019) was solved via the CPLEX Optimization software package. The results of a single objective problem are given in Table 1 for profit maximization (totally ignoring lost sales cost) and for lost sales cost minimization in Table 2.

For brevity, the decisions on harvesting, harvester assignment, hauler assignment, processor assignments, etc. are not shown here.

Note Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … Table 1 The solutions for profit maximization Table 2 The solutions for lost sales cost minimization Scenario 413 Maximal Profit (baht) Lost sales cost (baht) Normal situation 445,128.35 59,240.00 Inflation 462,351.85 67,152.00 Scenario Profit (baht) Minimal Lost sales cost (baht) Normal situation 388,363.70 57,104.00 Inflation 64,784.00 417,699.00 that for each scenario, these decisions could be different when the model is solved with different objectives.

The mixed-integer programming model provides decisions for daily operations of the agricultural supply chain such as harvesting plots to be harvested, harvester assignments, hauler assignment, processor assignments, etc. The total direct cost is the summation of five direct costs: harvesting cost, hauling cost, processing cost, holding cost, and transportation cost while lost sales cost is focused only on the indirect cost which directly links to shortage amount.

When the two objectives are considered simultaneously, as mentioned earlier, one of the objective functions must be converted into a constraint to use CPLEX to solve the problem. For instance, if the objective is to maximize profit and the lost sales cost is turned into a constraint as shown in Eq. (2), the value of Δ is treated as a parameter and is varied from 0 to 4000 for scenario 0 as shown in Table 3. According to Eq.

(2), the generated lost sales cost cannot be smaller than the minimal lost sales cost. By varying the value of Δ, solutions can be obtained with different profit and lost sales cost for each value of Δ as shown in Table 3. The Δ value can be interpreted as the additional lost sales cost allowed above the minimal lost sales cost.

As the lost sales cost constraint is relaxed by increasing the value of Δ, CPLEX finds different solutions with higher profits until it reaches the Table 3 Solutions of multi-objective problem with varying values of Δ Δ Minimal Lost sales cost + Δ (baht) Minimal Profit (baht) Lost sales cost (baht) 0 57,104.00 442,144.45 57,104.00 85 57,189.00 442,481.03 57,152.00 540 57,644.00 443,063.99 57,616.00 865 57,969.00 443,516.71 57,964.00 978 58,082.00 443,639.95 58,080.00 1,256 58,360.00 443,946.43 58,312.00 1,500 58,604.00 444,245.91 58,544.00 2,500 59,604.00 445,128.35 59,240.00 4,000 61,104.00 445,128.35 59,240.00 414 T. Sornprom et al.

absolute maximal profit when Δ is at 4,000. The effects of the Δ value on various cost elements are given in Table 3. Similarly, the value of ξ can be interpreted as the missed profit amount allowed from the absolute maximal profit. A similar result can be obtained by setting the lost sales cost minimization as the objective with the constraint on profit as shown in Eq. (4) earlier.

To obtain the set of non-dominated solutions or the Pareto front, each scenario must be solved multiple times with varying values of Δ or ξ as shown in Table 4 and Table 5, where appropriate. The sets of non-dominated solutions for all scenarios are shown in an X–Y plot of profit versus lost sales cost in Fig. 3. For the objective values plotted in Fig. 3, these points are associated with five main decisions for harvesting, hauling, production, delivery, and distribution.

The comparisons of these decisions will be made by using results from scenarios with normal condition and inflation. Table 6 is the results when  value is equal to 0. This table compares cost components for the scenarios of normal condition and inflation.

In the inflation situation, customers may buy more in anticipating rising price and this could lead to higher demand and if resources are not appropriately adjusted, production capacity may be limited and the lack of supplies may lead to higher lost sales. Consequently, the company may lose the opportunity to receive more benefits as shown in Table 6. The operation decisions of both scenarios in Table 6 are displayed in Figs.

4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 to illustrate the decisions for harvesting, hauling, processing, delivery, and distribution. As can be seen in Fig. 4, the model recommends different daily harvesting decisions for the two scenarios. If one is operating under the normal condition when inflation occurs, the demand outstrips supply. As a result, a shortage may occur. Figure 5 shows the daily hauling decisions for the two scenarios.

The hauling decisions are dependent on the harvesting decisions made in the previous stage of operation. The number of trips for daily hauling is calculated from the planned harvesting quantities. Again, the model indicates that too many haulers are assigned for inflation and not enough haulers if the hauler assignment is made to follow the normal operating condition. The processing decisions are shown in Fig. 6. In the test data, the product priority is product P1, P2, and P3 in that order.

The production cost for processors 3 and 4 are lower than the others. The model logically allocates the supply to be processed into product P1 by process 3 on day 1. On day 2, the quantity is higher than the capacity of processor 3 so the remaining quantity is assigned to processor 4. After day 2, the demand for product P2 and P3 are assigned after all demand for product P1 are assigned. Similar coordinated decisions are recommended by the model for delivery and distribution.

Figure 7 presents the vehicle trips of vehicle type 2, which has the cheapest cost. Daily product distribution decisions are shown in Fig. 8 along with the resulting shortages in Fig. 9. Overall, Figs.

4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 show the model’s recommended decisions under inflation condition and solution variations of resources along with the corresponding 179,700 179,850 179,850 179,850 179,850 179,850 179,850 179,850 179,850 0 85 540 865 978 1,256 1,500 2,500 4,000 Harvesting cost (baht) Δ 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,749.33 60,698.67 Hauling cost (baht) 32,082 32,082 32,687 32,894 33,108 33,185 33,499 33,897 33,974 Processing cost (baht) 86,655.32 86,655.32 85,798.76 85,513.24 85,227.72 85,084.96 84,656.68 84,085.64 83,942.88 Transportation cost (baht) Table 4 The effect of changing Δ values to costs for normal situation 804,465 804,465 803,331 802,953 802,575 802,386 801,819 801,063 800,460 Revenue (baht) 359,336.65 359,336.65 359,085.09 359,006.57 358,935.05 358,869.29 358,755.01 358,581.97 358,315.55 Total cost (baht) 445,128.35 445,128.35 444,245.91 443,946.43 443,639.95 443,516.71 443,063.99 442,481.03 442,144.45 Profit (baht) 59,240 59,240 58,544 58,312 58,080 57,964 57,616 57,152 57,104 Lost sales cost (baht) Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … 415 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 201,300 0 56 89 179 284 315 415 585 698 767 912 1,212 1,557 1,857 2,053 Harvesting cost (baht) Δ 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 67,994.67 Hauling cost (baht) 34,208 34,429 34,646 34,927 35,211 35,318 35,425 35,532 35,632 35,709 35,746 35,816 35,923 35,923 35,923 Processing cost (baht) Table 5 The effect of changing Δ values to costs for inflation 90,509.84 90,224.32 89,938.8 89,510.52 89,082.24 88,939.48 88,796.72 88,653.96 88,511.2 88,368.44 88,368.44 88,225.68 88,082.92 88,082.92 88,082.92 Transportation cost (baht) 865,626 865,248 864,870 864,303 863,736 863,547 863,358 863,169 862,980 862,791 862,791 862,602 862,413 862,413 862,413 Revenue (baht) 394,012.51 393,947.99 393,879.47 393,732.19 393,587.91 393,552.15 393,516.39 393,480.63 393,437.87 393,372.11 393,409.11 393,336.35 393,300.59 393,300.59 393,300.59 Total cost (baht) 471,613.49 471,300.01 470,990.53 470,570.81 470,148.09 469,994.85 469,841.61 469,688.37 469,542.13 469,418.89 469,381.89 469,265.65 469,112.41 469,112.41 469,112.41 Profit (baht) 75,068 74,836 74,604 74,256 73,908 73,792 73,676 73,560 73,444 73,328 73,328 73,212 73,096 73,096 73,096 Lost sales cost (baht) 416 T. Sornprom et al.

Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … 417 Fig. 3 Pareto frontier comparison Table 6 An example of scenario comparison Cost components (baht) Normal situation Inflation Harvesting cost 179,700.00 201,300.00 Hauling cost 60,698.67 67,994.67 Processing cost 33,974.00 35,923.00 Holding cost 0 0 Transportation cost 83,942.88 88,082.92 Revenue 800,460.00 862,413.00 Total cost 358,315.55 393,300.59 Profit 442,144.45 469,112.41 Lost Sales Cost 57,104.00 73,096.00 Fig.

4 The comparison of harvesting decision 418 T. Sornprom et al. Fig. 5 The comparison of hauling decision Fig. 6 The comparison of processing decision decisions under the normal scenario. The model can be conveniently exercised to assess supply chain risks under various conditions before making final decisions. Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … 419 Fig. 7 The comparison of delivery decision Fig.

8 The comparison of distribution decision 4 Conclusions This study applies a mixed-integer programming model for integrated planning of selective harvesting and post-harvest operations (Sornprom et al. 2019) for resilience analysis of an agricultural supply chain. A possible disruption, inflation, is included to study the variations of decisions, profit, and lost sales cost. CPLEX Optimization software package is used to find solutions for both single and multi-objective problems.

For a single objective problem, CPLEX tries to find an optimal solution for each case without considering another objective. This program can generate optimal solutions and decisions for both objectives. 420 T. Sornprom et al. Fig. 9 The comparison of possible shortage quantity For multi-objective cases, the Pareto frontiers provide a convenient way to tradeoff profit versus lost sales. The model also provides coordinated operating decisions for the corresponding profit and/or lost sales target.

For a larger size model, CPLEX solver may not be suitable as the solution tool because of the extremely long computational time. Metaheuristic methods might be a feasible solution method for larger industrial-scale problem. A possible direction of further studies would be to study other disruptions such as lack of workers, drought, equipment failure, and so on. References Ahumada O, Villalobos JR (2009) Application of planning models in the agri-food supply chain: a review.

Eur J Oper Res 195:1–20 Ali A, Mahfouz A, Arisha A (2017) Analysing supply chain resilience: integrating the constructs in a concept mapping framework via a systematic literature review. Int J Supply Chain Manage 16–39 Behzadi G, O’Sullivan MJ, Olsen TL, Scrimgeour F, Zhang A (2017) Robust and resilient strategies for managing supply disruptions in an agribusiness supply chain.

Int J Prod Econ 191:207–220 Borodin V, Bourtembourg J, Hnaien F, Labadie N (2016) Handling uncertainty in agricultural supply chain management: a state of the art. Eur J Oper Res 254:348–359 Bourlakis M, Maglaras G, Gallear D, Fotopoulos C (2014) Examining sustainability performance in the supply chain: the case of the Greek dairy sector. Ind Mark Manage 43:56–66 Carvalho H, Barroso AP, Machado VH, Azevedo S, Cruz-Machado V (2012) Supply chain redesign for resilience using simulation.

Comput Indus Eng 62:329–341 Dixit V, Seshadrinath N, Tiwari M (2016) Performance measures based optimization of supply chain network resilience: a NSGA-II + Co-Kriging approach. Comput Ind Eng 93:205–214 Resilience Analysis for Integrated Planning of Selective Harvesting … 421 Elleuch H, Dafaoui E, Elmhamedi A, Chabchoub H (2016a) Resilience and vulnerability in supply chain: literature review.

IFAC-PapersOnLine 49(12):1448–1453 Elleuch H, Dafaoui E, Mhamedi AE, Chabchoub H (2016b) A quality function deployment approach for production resilience improvement in supply chain: case of agrifood industry. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49(31):125–130 Freund RJ (1956) The introduction of risk into a programming model.

Econometrica 24(3):253–263 Goli A, Tirkolaee EB, Malmir B, Bian GB, Sangaiah AK (2019) A multi-objective invasive weed optimization algorithm for robust aggregate production planning under uncertain seasonal demand. Computing 101(6):499–529 Hosseini S, Ivanov D, Dolgui A (2019) Review of quantitative methods for supply chain resilience analysis. Transp Res Part E Logist Transp Rev 285–307 Itoh T, Ishii H, Nanseki T (2003) A model of crop planning under uncertainty in agricultural management.

Int J Product Econ 555–558 Jabbarzadeh A, Fahimnia B, Sheu J-B, Moghadam HS (2016) Designing a supply chain resilient to major disruptions and supply/demand interruptions. Transp Res Part B 94:121–149 Kamalahmadi M, Parast MM (2016) A review of the literature on the principles of enterprise and supply chain resilience: major findings and directions for future research.

Int J Product Econ 171:116–133 Leat P, Revoredo-Giha C (2013) Risk and resilience in agri-food supply chains: the case of the ASDA PorkLink supply chain in Scotland. Supply Chain Manage Int J 18(2):219–231 Manning L, Soon JM (2016) Building strategic resilience in the food supply chain. Br Food J 118(6):1477–1493 Merrill JM (2007) Managing risk in premium fruit and vegetable supply chains.

Master thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge Ponomarov SY, Holcomb MC (2009) Understanding the concept of supply chain resilience. Int J Logist Manage 20(1):124–143 Rezapour S, Farahani RZ, Pourakbar M (2017) Resilient supply chain network design under competition: a case study. Eur J Oper Res 259:1017–1035 Romero C (2000) Risk programming for agricultural resource allocation: a multidimensional risk approach.

Ann Oper Res 94:57–68 Septiani W, Marimin Herdiyeni Y, Haditjaroko L (2016) Method and approach mapping for agrifood supply chain risk management: a literature review. Int J Supply Chain Manage 5(2):51-64 Shrivastava H, Dutta P, Krishnamoorthy M, Suryawanshi P (2017) Designing a resilient supply chain network for perishable products with random disruptions. In: International multiconference of engineers and computer scientists. Hong Kong.

Singh CS, Soni G, Badhotiya GK (2019) Performance indicators for supply chain resilience: review. J Indus Eng Int 1–13 Sornprom T, Kachitvichyanukul V, Luong HT (2019) A multi-objective model for integrated planning of selective harvesting and post-harvest operations. In: Environmental sustainability in Asian logistics and supply chains. Springer, Singapore, pp 245–260 Tang CS (2006) Robust strategies for mitigating supply chain disruptions.

Int J Logist Res Appl 9(1):33–45 Tan B, Comden N (2012) Agricultural planning of annual plants under demand, maturation, harvest, and yield risk. Eur J Oper Res 220:539–549 Urciuoli L, Mohanty S, Hintsa J, Boekesteijn EG (2014) The resilience of energy supply chains: a multiple case study approach on oil and gas supply chains to Europe.

Supply Chain Manage Int J 19(1):46–63 Yavari M, Zaker H (2019) Designing a resilient-green closed loop supply chain network for perishable products by considering disruption in both supply chain and power networks. Comput Chem Eng 134:106680 Roadmap for a Successful Implementation of a Predictive Maintenance Strategy Marcel André Hoffmann and Rainer Lasch Abstract Machine failure can have significant impacts on increasingly global orientated supply chains in the producing industry.

Predictive maintenance (PdM) is a powerful method to avoid economic damage that can occur as a consequence of critical system breakdowns. The latest research shows that only a minority of industrial companies use an approach of residual lifetime prognosis in maintenance. Especially smaller and mid-sized enterprises have a lack of resources and knowledge to focus on a PdM strategy.

The purpose of this article is to provide a structured approach on how to implement a PdM strategy in industrial companies in order to reduce maintenance costs and resources. It contains practical orientated recommendations for analyzing, decision making, and implementation of a smart data-based maintenance strategy. Most of the relevant literature in this field focuses on operational decision making in maintenance and residual lifetime prognosis.

This chapter provides a structured integrative managerial approach of PdM with a focus on the implementation process of this strategy in an industrial context. Keywords Predictive maintenance · Maintenance management · Maintenance framework · Smart factory · Implementation process 1 Introduction Reliable production processes are crucial for industrial companies since machine downtime can lead to delivery failure and, consequently, to losses in sales.

Therefore, predictive maintenance is considered as an adequate strategy to avoid unplanned downtimes, as a forecast of the residual useful life (RUL) allows to conduct necessary maintenance activities before a breakdown occurs. The development of data-driven approaches was particularly extended in the past years with the latest innovations in the analysis of high amounts of data (Feng and Shanthikumar 2018). M. A. Hoffmann (B) · R. Lasch Chair of Business Management, esp.

Logistics, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden 01062, Germany e-mail: marcel.hoffmann@tu-dresden.de © The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020 P. Golinska-Dawson et al. (eds.

), Smart and Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics – Trends, Challenges, Methods and Best Practices, EcoProduction, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61947-3_29 423 424 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch Even though PdM provides the possibility to reduce total maintenance costs, only a minority of companies performed the implementation of this strategy successfully. According to the study from Haarman et al.

(2018), where 268 companies in The Netherlands, Germany, and Belgium were asked about their maturity of maintenance, only 11% implemented a PdM strategy in their maintenance management. A structured and application-oriented procedure is seen as necessary to support companies in a prosperous realization of PdM. Therefore, the following research questions arise in this context: 1. Which management-oriented frameworks can be found in the literature considering the implementation of PdM? 2.

How should a structured and application-oriented roadmap be developed to support the successful implementation of a predictive maintenance strategy in industrial companies? The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: Sect. 2 explains the general aspects of maintenance management and maintenance strategies. In Sect. 3, a systematic literature review (SLR) is conducted to give an overview of existing frameworks to implement a PdM strategy.

Section 4 shows a management-oriented roadmap to implement PdM, and conclusions are discussed in Sect. 5. 2 Maintenance Management A fundamental distinction is made between strategic and operational maintenance management. The necessary processes are divided into core, support, and management processes (Wald 2003). Within the core processes, those activities are grouped, which have a direct influence on the availability of the plants.

Support processes have no direct impact on operational maintenance activities but ensure smooth operations and availability. Management processes serve to plan and control maintenance targets and communication. Strategic maintenance management carries out mediumand long-term planning, control, and monitoring of the company’s maintenance objectives. On the other hand, operational maintenance management is responsible for the short- and medium-term implementation of the goals.

For this purpose, planning of maintenance program, capacities, and scheduling of maintenance activities are executed. The achievement of objectives is monitored through progress control (Wald 2003). The main aim of maintenance management is to minimize maintenance costs. These are divided into direct and indirect costs. Direct maintenance costs include all expenses for carrying out maintenance activities.

These mainly include costs for materials, personnel, and operating resources or external services. With increasing maintenance intensity (MI), the direct maintenance costs increase proportionally. The indirect costs result from the failure of plants and their economic consequences for the company. In the event of a breakdown within interlinked processes, capacity Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 425 Fig.

1 Maintenance Costs (MC), based on Lasch (2018) costs are incurred due to downtimes in subsequent plants. Besides, costs are incurred due to lost contribution margins (Matyas 2016; Pawellek 2016). As the intensity of maintenance increases, indirect maintenance costs are negatively proportional. Compared to direct costs, indirect maintenance costs can reach a value that is three to five times as high, which underlines their high relevance (Kuhn et al. 2006).

Figure 1 shows an exemplary course of the total maintenance costs as a function of the direct and indirect costs, according to Lasch (2018). Maintenance management aims to find the right balance between the expenses for maintenance activities and the resulting consequential costs for inadequate maintenance by choosing appropriate maintenance strategies. 2.1 Maintenance Strategies According to the European standard DIN EN 13,306, there are four different maintenance strategies.

These are reactive, preventive time-based, preventive conditionbased, and predictive maintenance (CEN 2017). Within reactive maintenance, components are only replaced when damage has occurred, or the wear reserve has been exhausted. This strategy leads to high downtimes and unscheduled maintenance activities. Within time-based maintenance, fixed intervals are defined in which measures are carried out to prevent machine failure and breakdown.

This strategy leads to great planning opportunities and low downtimes. However, components are replaced prematurely, which results in higher material and personnel costs. Timebased maintenance can also be used where it is not possible to observe the condition using sensors or inspection by employees (Pawellek 2016). Condition-based maintenance (CBM) pursues the goal of using up the wear inventory as completely as possible and replacing it shortly before it breaks down.

The condition is either recorded by sensors via condition monitoring systems or determined by trained employees. The PdM strategy goes beyond the characteristics of 426 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch CBM by forecasting the residual useful life (RUL) and thus predicting the time to failure (Pawellek 2016). 2.2 Predictive Maintenance With the PdM strategy, trend analyses or RUL forecasts are used to determine at which point the wear reserve is optimally exhausted and a maintenance measure is necessary.

This maintenance strategy makes it possible to carry out long-term planning for activities to make sufficient resources available at the right time. Also, the wear reserve of the components is used to the best possible extent. This leads to low material costs, which is particularly relevant for expensive spare parts (Pawellek 2016). Another intention of PdM is to detect hidden faults through permanent plant monitoring and thus prevent unplanned downtimes.

This strategy is used, where plants of high value are operated, and machine failure would have fatal consequences for the production process. PdM strategies are also used in areas in which the technical condition of a system is a decisive factor for human health and safety. A precise prediction of the objects’ RUL is of central importance for this strategy, which requires a high degree of experience and efficient data processing (Pawellek 2016).

The approaches of the RUL prediction can be divided into three main methods. These are data-driven, model-driven, and hybrid procedures. Data-driven methods use sensor measurements as input data, and prognoses are conducted through statistical methods. On the other hand, there are data-driven approaches that use artificial intelligence or machine learning algorithms like artificial neuronal networks (ANN). Those methods require training data sets to set up the algorithms.

Once the system is trained, it provides precise prognosis results without significant modelling expenditure (Si et al. 2017). Modell driven approaches can come into use when sensor measurements are not possible. Therefore, complex physical and mathematical models of the deterioration process are necessary to predict the RUL of the investigated object (Sun et al. 2019). Hybrid approaches are combinations of data and model-based methods to compensate for specific disadvantages.

Therefore, data-driven procedures can, e.g., be used to validate model-driven approaches or increase their precision (Di Maio et al. 2012). Even though the scientific literature provides a wide range of PdM approaches, the study from Haarman et al. (2018) shows that only a minority of companies implemented this maintenance strategy successfully. This fact shows a disparity between research findings and application activities into industrial maintenance management.

Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 427 3 Systematic Literature Review 3.1 Methodology The SLR approach according to Cooper (1982), contains the five stages of problem formulation, data collection, data evaluation, analysis, and interpretation, as well as a public presentation. Considering research question 1, the problem formulation consists of the search for application-oriented managerial approaches to implement a PdM strategy in an industrial context.

To determine the most relevant literature for this problem, the databases Academic Search Complete, Business Source Complete, and EconLit with Full Text are used because of their high amount of economic and management relevant literature with the following search string: (framework OR roadmap OR approach) AND (predictive maintenance OR condition based maintenance OR prognosis and health management OR preventive maintenance OR prescriptive maintenance OR PdM) AND (implement* OR applicat* OR apply OR execut*) NOT (ship* OR aviation OR aircraft OR mariti* OR medic* OR airport OR biolog* OR agricultur*).

Either the title of the paper, subject terms, or the abstract must contain a synonym of roadmap together with one phrase of the topic predictive maintenance and a synonym of implementation. Besides this, some terms are excluded from the search that are not relevant to solve the described task. The topic of this research is primarily practical orientated.

Therefore, no restriction is made concerning the article ranking to not exclude any unranked application-oriented literature, e.g., from consulting companies. To find any relevant articles for answering the research question 1, the paper underwent a title screening to exclude any literature without a reference to the topic of implementing a predictive maintenance strategy.

An abstract screening of the remaining articles revealed 93 potentially relevant articles that underwent a full-text screening. General requirements for process-models such as accuracy, relevance, economy, clarity, comparability, and a systematic structure were further criteria of the analyzed frameworks (Becker et al. 2000; König 2009).

Most of the excluded articles focused on residual useful life (RUL) prediction strategies and had a lack of implementational or managerial approaches in the context of PdM. As a result, the authors selected nine relevant articles. A forward and backward search revealed six further papers that are relevant to answer the research question 1. In total, 15 articles were chosen for this purpose, that where published between 2007 and 2019.

3.2 Findings Since this paper aims to provide a generic roadmap that faces managerial aspects of implementing a PdM strategy, the following analysis criteria were derived from the 428 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch examined frameworks and considered relevant for an application-oriented implementation process of PdM. The framework should be management-oriented, and therefore contain a cost–benefit analysis of PdM implementation to make sure, the implementation creates a value addition in maintenance.

The implementation process should be described with recommendations about how a PdM strategy can be applied to the maintenance management system, so a potential user of the proposed framework can execute the implementation step by step. Furthermore, the framework should contain approaches of RUL prognosis to be considered as PdM related, and include a feedback loop to enable improvements of the maintenance system from a practical point of view.

To avoid stand-alone system solutions, and use information of the existing ERP-system, the framework also should take a connection to existing IT systems into account. A comparison of the analyzed articles considering the criteria explained above is made in Table 1. Every framework has strengths and weaknesses according to the proposed aspects. A cost–benefit analysis is not treated at all in two articles.

General efficiency factors of implementing PdM are mentioned within the remaining 13 articles, whereas only Vogl et al. (2014) included a cost–benefit analysis as a full process step into their framework. The implementation process is described in the majority of the analyzed articles as a structured and iterative procedure. Only three of the screened paper did not provide practical descriptions of the application since they focused on PdM architecture building.

A PdM relation is given by 13 of the proposed articles since these provide RUL prognosis approaches for the maintenance objects. Two of the analyzed articles are not considered as PdM related as they focus on CBM without implementing prediction methods. A make or buy decision is only partially considered by the article from Schmidt and Wang (2018). Their proposed cloud manufacturing approach enables the use of a Maintenance-as-a-Service model with the inclusion of external service providers.

However, a detailed make or buy analysis is not included in the framework. The installation of a feedback loop can be found by four of the analyzed articles, but none of these focused on feedback as a tool to optimize the maintenance from a management-related view. Instead, the feedback is used to improve the precision of further prognosis results in the proposed approaches.

To ensure consistent data and information flow, it is necessary to aim for an embedded RUL prediction and maintenance decision solution. This task is faced by eight of the evaluated articles, whereas especially the articles of Ansari et al. (2019) and Groba et al. (2007) contain detailed recommendations about the connection between the RUL prediction and the production and resource planning of the company.

The majority of the articles focus on RUL prediction approaches and the implementation of the framework. In contrast, management relevant tasks like cost–benefitratios, make or buy decisions, and feedback loop are rarely treated by the investigated literature. This paper aims to provide such a generic roadmap for industrial purposes. Therefore, not only technical criteria are seen as relevant tasks, but also management related aspects.

Furthermore, the analysed articles did not contain explanations about the requirements of the individually proposed frameworks. Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 429 Table 1 Evaluation of the literature analysis Cost–benefit analysis Implementation process PdM relation Make or buy decision Feedback loop Connection to existing IT − + ++ − ++ ++ Márquez et al. − (2019) + ++ − − − Nguyen and Medjaher (2019) − − ++ − − − Qu et al. (2019) + + + − − − Haarman et al.

+ (2018) ++ ++ − − + Katona and Panfilov (2018) + ++ + − − + Schmidt and Wang (2018) + + ++ + + + Selcuk (2017) + + ++ − − + Park et al. (2016) − + − − − − Bousdekis et al. (2015) + + ++ − + − Mehta et al. (2015) + − + − + + Vogl et al. (2014) ++ + + − − − Lewandowski and Scholz-Reiter (2013) + + + − − + Sharma (2013) − + − − − − Groba et al. (2007) − − + − − ++ Ansari et al.

(2019) 4 Implementation Roadmap The SLR shows a lack of overall management and efficiency based frameworks to implement a PdM strategy that faces the explained requirements. According to research question 2, this paper aims to provide such a generic roadmap with a focus on management relevant tasks of the PdM application. 430 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch The structured implementation process is related to the framework of Haarman et al. (2018).

The division of the roadmap in analysis, decision making, and implementation compares to the system engineering model proposed by Lewandowski and Scholz-Reiter (2013). The integration of the strategical and tactical aspects, as well as overall managerial and organizational criteria, are related to Qu et al. (2019). According to Vogl et al. (2014), a cost–benefit analysis is fused into the roadmap as a process step within the decision phase.

A make or buy decision following the approach of Schmidt and Wang (2018), is also integrated into this part of the roadmap, and extended by decision support methods. The presented approach of Ansari et al. (2019) contains recommendations about implementing software and data processing for PdM related solutions and installing a feedback-loop. Therefore, a data warehouse system, as well as a RUL prediction toolbox, are integrated into the software side of this roadmap.

The implementation of a feedback-policy aims to continuously improve maintenance management by using findings that are gained during the operation. Furthermore, this framework clarifies that implementing a PdM strategy is recommended to proceed in a project-oriented way (Pawellek 2016). The structure of the proposed roadmap is shown in Fig. 2, and the individual process steps are explained in the following.

4.1 Analysis 4.1.1 Analysis of Existing Maintenance Management The maintenance management has to choose an optimal combination of the available maintenance strategies to minimize the total maintenance costs. A thorough analysis of the current maintenance management should determine the actual condition and show potential benefits as well as an effort for the introduction of PdM. In the first step, the current maintenance management will be examined.

Maintenance costs are used as an essential criterion for this. The direct costs are usually recorded comprehensively by the accounting department. The focus within the analysis is, therefore, more on indirect costs. As mentioned before, this is particularly important because indirect maintenance costs often have a much higher value than direct costs, and the choice of the maintenance strategy has a significant influence on the composition of the costs.

The absolute amount of indirect maintenance costs is complicated to determine (Pawellek 2016; Rötzel and Rötzel-Schwunk 2017). The maintenance performance is rarely directly measurable and quantifiable. The use of meaningful KPI’s can at least partially compensate for this disadvantage and compare the performance of different departments or companies. KPI’s are divided into absolute values (basic figures) and ratios, which represent quotients of observation values and reference values.

Maintenance relevant indicators can be personnel cost ratio, maintenance material cost ratio, failure rate, maintenance cost ratio, or external service ratio (Rötzel and Rötzel-Schwunk 2017). Further analysis criteria include structural and process organization, failure causes, and available information systems.

Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 431 Analysis (t) Analysing Maintenance Management Implementation Decision Making (t) Process Analysis (implementation benefits) Service Provider (t) Technical Analysis (implementation costs) (s) PdM Decision (cost-benefit analysis, make or buy decision) (t) PdM Techniques Hardware (sensors, edge devices) (t) Software (data warehouse, RUL prediction toolbox) (t) Implementation (s) strategic (t) tactical Fig.

2 Implementation Roadmap, own study information feedback-loop 432 4.1.2 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch Process Analysis Process analysis is a crucial factor to investigate the potential benefits or necessity of a PdM strategy. The degree of concatenation is a vital factor in industrial processes. In lean production processes, buffers are avoided wherever possible, and a minimum of safety stock is required.

Hence, in the event of an unplanned failure, a plant shutdown can occur, which affects a large part of the production. With such critical processes, especially, it is important to obtain a reliable forecast of the expected RUL to avoid a production shutdown. According to Pawellek (2016), the degree of automation of the production process also plays a decisive role in the classification of plants.

The position of a plant under consideration within the production process has a further influence on maintenance. It is an advantage to consider the needs of subsequent maintenance right from the factory planning stage. Parallel systems, for instance, those in which there are multiple machines with the same performance, have a slight risk of total failure.

Serial configurations may be cheaper to purchase, but their lack of redundancy leads to a much higher risk of causing high indirect maintenance costs due to unplanned plant downtimes (Strunz 2012). Further criteria that are included in the process analysis are failure frequency, product requirements, as well as legal framework conditions that can require the use of a PdM strategy.

A predictive strategy also allows a reduction of storage costs, since spare parts can be procured as required due to a minimal risk of unplanned failure (Pawellek 2016). 4.1.3 Technical Analysis Technical analysis of the plants is necessary to be done to determine the effort to implement a PdM strategy. If condition monitoring systems are already used for maintenance purposes, it is examined how the data can be usable for RUL prediction.

The introduction of a predictive strategy is accompanied by little effort at plants where the required sensor technology is already available. For systems where no maintenance-relevant data are collected yet, it is checked how relevant parameters can be made measurable with as little effort as possible. There are many useable tools in the field of sensor technology, which offers cost-effective solutions (VDMA 2018).

A further criterion to be taken into account when assessing the implementation effort is the available installation space. Restrictions can also arise in the context of the sensor position, which limits the selection of sensors. Possible interferences must also be taken into account in the application of sensors to exclude falsified measured values. These can be, for example, vibrations that affect the component from the outside.

The available power supply and communication interfaces must also be included in the analysis (Pawellek 2016; Feng and Shanthikumar 2018). It is necessary to classify the findings of the process analysis as well as the technical analysis to enable decision-making about the implementation of a predictive strategy.

Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 433 Therefore, it is possible to use a Pareto-Analysis where the A category includes, for example, the 10% of plants that have the highest maintenance costs, downtimes, failure frequencies, etc. and thus have the highest benefit potential for predictive maintenance. Category B contains the systems that have descending values of the criteria between 10 and 30%. Category C includes the remaining 70%.

A similar classification is done for the aforementioned technical analysis with a XYZ categorization, whereas category X represents low, Y medium, and Z a high implementation effort. Other methods to prioritize the maintenance objects can be the Balanced Score Card or the FMEA (Strunz 2012; Pawellek 2016). 4.2 Decision Making 4.2.1 Decision Support Matrix To create an overview of the existing portfolio of maintenance objects, the method of ABC-XYZ decision matrix is used.

This is necessary to gain information about the potential and effort of implementing a PdM strategy to the considered plants. Therefore, the results of the ABC-classification of the process analysis are plotted on the ordinate. The prioritized objects of the technical analysis (XYZ) are deducted on the abscissa. The proposed decision matrix is shown in Fig. 3.

According to the classification of each maintenance object, the following recommendations can be made about the implementation of a predictive strategy: AX–highly recommended implementation, BX, AY–recommended implementation, Potential Fig. 3 Decision support matrix, own study high AX AY AZ medium BX BY BZ low CX CY CZ low medium high Effort 434 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch CX, BY, AZ–selective realization, CY, BZ–implementation in individual cases, CZ–currently no implementation.

The decision to implement a PdM strategy is followed by a make or buy analysis. Small and medium-sized companies often do not have the opportunity to set up a maintenance department that has the know-how for all necessary maintenance activities. Therefore, it is not only crucial for smaller companies to carefully consider which tasks belong to the core competences of their maintenance department and which should be performed by external service providers.

The primary focus here is on cost-effectiveness (Strunz 2012). 4.2.2 Maintenance Service Provider Due to their specialization, many service providers have an extensive range of offers in the field of maintenance services. The make or buy decision of maintenance activities can be supported by several analysis methods. These can be based on cost accounting, transaction costs, market orientation, resource orientation, and principalagent approach (Lasch 2019).

Services that are not suitable for external contracting are those that have to be carried out by the company as a legal entity. These include, for example, occupational safety and environmental safety tasks (Strunz 2012). Furthermore, it is not advisable to outsource activities that have a significant influence on the company’s objectives. These include planning and quality assurance within plant maintenance.

On the other hand, there are activities that, for legal reasons, must be performed by external service providers or tasks that are not part of the core areas of the company. The decision to outsource must be considered on a case-bycase basis. The maintenance activities can be carried out both by manufacturers of the equipment and by external maintenance service providers. Furthermore, it is crucial to fuse the maintenance services into the companies’ maintenance management system (Pawellek 2016).

4.2.3 Choice of PdM Techniques The choice of appropriate RUL prediction approaches is a crucial factor within the application of PdM. According to Lei et al. (2018), PdM approaches consist of the steps data acquisition, construction of the health indicator, division of the health stage and RUL prediction. Data acquisition is achieved by sensor measurements, data transmission and data storage.

Within the construction of the health indicator, signal processing or AI algorithms are applied to the data set for measurement noise filtering, and feature extraction to achieve a representation of the health condition. The division of the health state, also known as fault detection, aims to divide the health Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 435 indicator into a healthy and an unhealthy stage.

A classification in more than two stages is also possible and depends on the individual wear pattern of the maintenance object (Lei et al. 2018). The subsequent RUL prediction step focuses on the prognosis of the period between the current condition and the objects’ end of life, that is set as a failure threshold. This threshold should be described in the form of a probability distribution as several criteria influence a breakdown.

The choice of the particular RUL prognosis method depends on the deterioration process of the monitored part. An overview of the commonly used algorithms and their advantages and disadvantages can be found in the paper of Lee et al. (2014). 4.3 Implementation Process 4.3.1 Hardware To successfully implement the methods of PdM, it is necessary to coordinate the required software and hardware, so complications at interfaces and expensive standalone solutions can be avoided.

Furthermore, it is crucial to pay attention to the hardand software components that are already implemented and to analyze, how they can be embedded into the required solutions for PdM. The global goal is to develop an integrated solution instead of numerous isolated applications (Schmidt and Wang 2018). Relevant data have to be collected to gain information about the condition of a component.

Therefore, a large number of different sensors are available and have to be chosen for the individual use case of condition monitoring. The most commonly deployed method is vibration analysis, which is performed by measuring accelerations and forces to diagnose imbalances, damage to the gear, or bearings (Selcuk 2017). The selection of the appropriate sensors must be made depending on the component to be monitored and is also influenced by the available space and environmental conditions.

Further methods are thermography, electrophysical methods, flow measurement, or geometric quantities such as distance, angle, or position (Selcuk 2017; Sun et al. 2019). Furthermore, mobile devices or terminals are necessary to inform the responsible worker about the condition of the maintenance objects or upcoming maintenance activities. Applications of augmented reality (AR) are also used in the context of maintenance and repair. Considering Palmarini et al.

(2018), AR is used primarily in this field to support assembly or disassembly processes and repairs. 436 4.3.2 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch Software The high amount of process, product, and machine data require a robust data warehouse system. Furthermore, a toolbox for data analytics is necessary for the prediction of RUL. This toolbox can be linked to machine learning algorithms to enable artificial intelligence applications (Ansari et al. 2019).

Cloud computing solutions, in which external service providers deliver the required software and applications, make it possible to find inexpensive entry-level solutions for PdM. They convince through flexible and scalable usage models of the providers. The only requirement is sufficient internet access. By using IoT enabled sensors, collected data can be stored directly in a cloud.

The prognosis algorithms can then either be applied directly on mobile devices or be carried out by another service provider connected to the cloud system (Schmidt and Wang 2018). 4.3.3 Implementation in Maintenance Management The implementation of a PdM strategy should be seen as an integral part of the management processes. This is especially the case since the analysis and application of PdM is usually determined by the management.

Further management criteria that are affected by this strategy are the objectives and targets of maintenance. The fundamental goal of maximum system availability at the lowest possible cost remains the same, but some specific tasks within plant maintenance change. For example, organizational and process structures are undergoing changes that must be adapted to new maintenance challenges by the management.

This is because maintenance activities within a predictive strategy require fewer ad hoc measures, and better planning is predominant. Furthermore, sufficiently trained employees must be available who can meet the challenges, mainly due to the complexity of the information technology used (Wald 2003). The use of PdM means that an optimum time for the replacement of a spare part is determined shortly before its failure. However, this conflicts with production planning.

The interests of both areas must be taken into account to achieve the most efficient results within maintenance. This can be done either through a holistic approach within the ERP system used or through the use of algorithms that respect both the concerns of the data-based status information of plants and information about the production schedule to reach smart maintenance management (Feng and Shanthikumar 2018).

4.3.4 Feedback Feedback from operational maintenance is essential to incorporate the findings from the practical implementation and operational phase of PdM into the strategic orientation and objectives of maintenance management (Ansari et al. 2019).

Various quality management methods are available for this purpose, e.g., the Continual Improvement Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 437 Process (CIP) that is defined in the ISO 9001 and is also a relevant part of the Total Productive Maintenance concept. The aim is to achieve a permanent improvement of processes through regular suggestions for change made by employees. According to Sharma (2013), benchmarking is another efficient way to improve maintenance processes.

Therefore, processes of cooperative best-practice companies are analyzed according to predefined benchmarking goals to enhance the maintenance processes of the analyzing company. 5 Conclusion Predictive maintenance is a powerful method to avoid unplanned machine failure and losses in sales due to process downtimes. The research of the existing literature shows a lack of management and application orientated frameworks to support the implementation of PdM.

This paper provides a structured recommendation of analyzing, decision making, and implementation of a predictive strategy. Nevertheless, it is not reasonable to apply this strategy to every maintenance object in the company. The proposed roadmap should be seen as a contribution to find an optimal mix of maintenance strategies, and therefore to minimize maintenance costs.

Further research has to be done to validate and implement the proposed roadmap in a practical environment, as well as to gain information about the reasons for the low percentage of successful implementations of PdM. Besides, the latest development on prescriptive maintenance focus on a holistic approach of maintenance and production management to receive smart and IoT supported solutions that also require further research in that field.

References Ansari F, Glawar R, Nemeth T (2019) PriMa: a prescriptive maintenance model for cyber-physical production systems. Int J Comput Integr Manuf 32(4–5):482–503 Becker J, Kugeler M, Rosemann M (2000) Prozessmanagement, 2nd edn. Springer, Heidelberg Bousdekis A, Magoutas B, Apostolou D, Mentzas G (2015) A proactive decision making framework for condition-based maintenance. Indus Manage Data Syst 115(7):1225–1250 CEN (2017) DIN EN 13306: maintenance—maintenance terminology.

Beuth Verlag, Berlin Cooper HM (1982) Scientific guidelines for conducting integrative research reviews. Rev Educ Res 52(2):291–302 Di Maio F, Tsui KL, Zio E (2012) Combining relevance vector machines and exponential regression for bearing residual life estimation. Mech Syst Signal Process 31:405–427 Feng Q, Shanthikumar JG (2018) How research in production and operations management may evolve in the era of Big Data.

Product Operat Manage 27(9):1670–1684 Groba C, Cech S, Rosenthal F, Gössling A (2007) Architecture of a predictive maintenance framework. In: Proceedings—6th international conference on computer information systems and industrial management applications, CISIM 2007, pp 59–64 438 M. A. Hoffmann and R. Lasch Haarman M, Klerk P, de Decaigny P, Mulders M, Vassiliadis C, Sijtsema H, Gallo I (2018) Beyond the hype: PdM 4.0 delivers results. Predictive Maintenance 4.0. Retrieved from https://www.pwc.

de/de/industrielle-produktion/pwc-predictive-maintenance-4-0.pdf Katona A, Panfilov P (2018) Building predictive maintenance framework for smart factory environment application systems. In: 29th DAAAM international symposium on intelligent manufacturing and automation, pp 460–471 König S (2009) Ein Wiki-basiertes Vorgehensmodell für Business Intelligence Projekte.

In: Perspektiven Der Betrieblichen Management- Und Entscheidungsunterstützung, pp 33–52 Kuhn A, Schuh G, Stahl B (2006) Nachhaltige Instandhaltung: Trends, Potenziale und Handlungsfelder. In: Ergebnisbericht Nachhaltige Instandhaltung. Available from https://www.ifm.com/obj/ VDMA_Nachhaltige_Instandhaltung.pdf Lasch R (2018) Strategisches und operatives Logistikmanagement: Prozesse, 2nd edn. Springer, Wiesbaden Lasch R (2019) Strategisches und operatives Logitikmanagement: Beschaffung, 2nd edn.

Springer, Wiesbaden Lee J, Wu F, Wenyu Z, Ghaffari M, Liao L, Siegel D (2014) Prognosis and health management design for rotary machinery systems—reviews, methodology and applications. Mech Syst Signal Process 42:314–334 Lei Y, Li N, Guo L, Li N, Yan T, Lin J (2018) Machinery health prognostics: a systematic review from data acquisition to RUL prediction.

Mech Syst Signal Process 104:799–834 Lewandowski M, Scholz-Reiter B (2013) Condition-based maintenance systems: application at a German Sea Port. Int J Indus Eng 20(1–2):2–11 Márquez AC, de la Fuente Carmona A, Antomarioni S (2019) A process to implement an artificial neural network and association rules techniques to improve asset performance and energy efficiency. Energies 12(18) Matyas K (2016) Instandhaltungslogistik, 6th edn.

Hanser Verlag, München Mehta P, Werner A, Mears L (2015) Condition based maintenance-systems integration and intelligence using Bayesian classification and sensor fusion. J Intell Manuf 26(2):331–346 Nguyen KTP, Medjaher K (2019) A new dynamic predictive maintenance framework using deep learning for failure prognostics. Reliab Eng Syst Safety 188:251–262 Palmarini R, Erkoyuncu JA, Roy R, Torabmostaedi H (2018) A systematic review of augmented reality applications in maintenance.

Robot Comput Integrated Manuf 49:215–228 Park C, Moon D, Do N, Bae SM (2016) A predictive maintenance approach based on real-time internal parameter monitoring. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 85(1–4):623–632 Pawellek G (2016) Integrierte Instandhaltung und Ersatzteillogistik, 2nd edn. Springer, Berlin Qu Y, Ming X, Qiu S, Zheng M, Hou Z (2019) An integrative framework for online prognostic and health management using internet of things and convolutional neural network.

Sensors 19(10) Rötzel A, Rötzel-Schwunk I (2017) Instandhaltung - eine betriebliche Herausforderung, 5th edn. VDE Verlag GmbH, Berlin Schmidt B, Wang L (2018) Cloud-enhanced predictive maintenance. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 99(1–4):5–13 Selcuk S (2017) Predictive maintenance, its implementation and latest trends. Proc Instit Mech Eng Part B J Eng Manuf 231(9):1670–1679 Sharma SK (2013) Maintenance reengineering framework: a case study.

J Quality Maint Eng 19(2):96–113 Si X, Zhang Z-X, Hu C-H (2017) Data-driven remaining useful life prognosis techniques: stochastic models, methods and applications. Springer, Berlin Strunz M (2012) Instandhaltung. Springer, Heidelberg Sun B, Li Y, Wang Z, Ren Y, Feng Q, Yang D, Chen X (2019) Remaining useful life prediction of aviation circular electrical connectors using vibration-induced physical model and particle filtering method.

Microelectron Reliab 92:114–122 VDMA (2018) Guideline sensors for industrie 4.0—options for cost-efficient sensor systems, 0–29 Roadmap for a Successful Implementation … 439 Vogl GW, Weiss BA, Donmez MA (2014) Standards for prognostics and health management (PHM) techniques within manufacturing operations. In: PHM 2014—proceedings of the annual conference of the prognostics and health management society 2014, 2013, pp 576–588 Wald G (2003) Prozessorientiertes Instandhaltungsmanagement.

Shaker Verlag, Aachen

Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Dr. Dawei Lu Download free books at Dr. Dawei Lu Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 2 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management © 2011Dr.

Dawei Lu & bookboon.com ISBN 978-87-7681-798-5 Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 3 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Contents Contents Preface 7 1 Introduction 8 1.1 Why Supply Chain Management 8 1.2 Defining supply chains 9 1.2 Customer Orientation 11 1.3 Defining Supply Chain Management 13 1.3 Development Trends 16 2 Global Supply Chain Operations 17 2.1 Global Business Environment 17 TMP 2.2 PRODUCTION Strategic Challenges 6 x 42.3 jcs NY028099B How Global Supply Chains Responded 1 2014 19 JEGREENE 23 2.4 Current Trends in Global SCM 3 Supply Chain Design and Planning 30 3.1 Supply Chain Configuration 30 3.3 Extent of Vertical Integration 32 ACCCTR00 bookboon27 ©2014 Accenture.

All rights rserved. Bring your talent and passion to a global organization at the forefront of business, technology and innovation. Discover how great you can be.

Visit accenture.com/bookboon Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 4 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Contents 3.4 Outsourcing and Offshoring 34 3.5 Location Decisions 39 3.6 Capacity Planning 42 3.7 Bullwhip Effect 44 4 Lean Supply Management 50 4.1 Origins of the Lean Manufacturing 50 4.2 Lean Supply Principles 51 4.3 Focusing on Cost-to-Serve 56 4.4 Drivers for Lean Supply Chain 57 4.5 Lean Process Mapping Tools 60 5 Agile Supply Management 70 5.1 The Need for Agility 70 5.2 Agile Supply Chain Concept 71 5.3 Agile Supply Chain Framework 74 5.4 Competing on Responsiveness 77 5.5 Getting It Right from Within.

80 6 Purchasing and Supplier Selection 83 6.1 Strategic Role of Purchasing 83 6.2 Purchasing Portfolio 85  678'<)25<2850$67(5©6'(*5(( &KDOPHUV8QLYHUVLW\RI7HFKQRORJ\FRQGXFWVUHVHDUFKDQGHGXFDWLRQLQHQJLQHHU LQJDQGQDWXUDOVFLHQFHVDUFKLWHFWXUHWHFKQRORJ\UHODWHGPDWKHPDWLFDOVFLHQFHV DQGQDXWLFDOVFLHQFHV%HKLQGDOOWKDW&KDOPHUVDFFRPSOLVKHVWKHDLPSHUVLVWV IRUFRQWULEXWLQJWRDVXVWDLQDEOHIXWXUH¤ERWKQDWLRQDOO\DQGJOREDOO\ 9LVLWXVRQ&KDOPHUVVHRU1H[W6WRS&KDOPHUVRQIDFHERRN Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 5 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Contents 6.3 Supplier Selection 88 6.4 Tools for Supplier Selection 89 6.5 Towards Knowledge Based Sourcing 91 7 Relationship and Integration 94 7.1 Supply Relationship Defined 94 7.2 Close Partnership 95 7.3 Strategic Alliance 98 7.4 Relationship Dilemma 99 7.5 Supply Chain Integration 103 8 The Future Challenges 105 8.1 Creating Customer Centric Supply Chain 105 8.2 Managing Supply Networks 107 8.3 Watch the Dynamics 109 9 References 112 I’M WITH ZF.

SOFTWARE DEVELOPER AND RACING CHAMPION. www.im-with-zf.com LIBOR JELÍNEK Soft ware Develop er ZF Friedrichshafen Scan the code and find out more about me and what I do at ZF: AG Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 6 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Preface Preface I feel honoured to have this opportunity to write a book about the fundamental of supply chain management for the BookBoon.com Ltd and Ventus Publishing ApS.

The chosen topic represents my attempt to respond to the growing demand for better understanding of supply chain management from managers, academics and graduate students alike. This book is based upon my 15 years of teaching experience gained through working in 6 different countries around world. Most of my courses on supply chain management were targeted at the master and executive levels, from which I have learned and enjoyed as much as my students do.

The most important lesson I learned is that supply chain management is a dynamic and evolving subject. It is not a subject that just needs to be taught, but the one needs to be constantly developed. To certain extent, this book will hopefully contribute to such a development. Due to the constraints in the number of pages, this book will primarily focus on the fundamental principles of supply chain management.

It will cover all the key conceptual areas with short business cases, but is limited in scope on management skill coaching. The book is particularly suitable for those readers who may have come across the subject anecdotally but have never studied it systematically. In order to continuously improve my book, I would appreciate any suggestions and comments. Please do not hesitate to get in touch with me through: dawei.lu12@gmail.com.

Dr. Dawei Lu April, 2011 Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 7 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction 1 Introduction 1.1 Why Supply Chain Management A supply chain is basically a group of independent organisations connected together through the products and services that they separately and/or jointly add value on in order to deliver them to the end consumer.

It is very much an extended concept of an organisation which adds value to its products or services and delivers them to its customers. But what is the benefit of understanding the value adding from the supply chain perspective? Why managing supply chain is becoming necessary and important to today’s business success? These are some of the fundamental questions that must be first addressed before discussing the “how to” questions.

Over the last three decades, the concept and theory of business management have undergone profound changes and development. Many old ways of doing business have been challenged and many new ideas and approaches have been created, among them are business process re-engineering, strategic management, lean thinking, agile manufacturing, balanced scorecard, blue ocean strategy, … just to name a few.

Supply chain management is undoubtedly one of those new and well grown management approaches emerged and rapidly developed across all industries around the world. The earliest appearance of the term ‘supply chain management’ as we know it today published in recognisable media and literatures can be traced back to the early 1980s.

More precisely, it first appeared in a Financial Times article written by Oliver and Webber in 1982 describing the range of activities performed by the organization in procuring and managing supplies. However the early publications of supply chain management in the 1980s were mainly focused on purchasing activities and cost reduction related activities.

The major development and the significant increases of publications in the areas of supply chain integration and supplier-buyer relationship came in 1990s when the concept as we know it today was gradually established. It is therefore clear that supply chain management is not one of the legacy academic subjects existed for hundreds or thousands of years, but rather a young and even nascent subject. It is only recently that business world started making use of this concept.

So, the question is “Why now?” A convincing answer to this question is that our business environment has changed, which includes globalisation, more severe competition, heightened customer expectation, technological impact and geopolitical factors and so on. Under such a renewed business environment, an organisation focused management approach is no longer adequate to deliver the required competitiveness.

Managers must therefore understand that their businesses are only part of the supply chains that they participated and it is the supply chain that wins or loses the competition. Thus, the arena of competition is moving from ‘organisation against organisation’ to ‘supply chain against supply chain’. The survival of any business today is no longer solely dependent on its own ability to compete but rather on the ability to cooperate within the supply chain.

The seemingly independent relation between the organisations within the supply chain becomes ever more interdependent. You “sink or swim with the supply chain.” It is for this reason that gives rise to the need for supply chain management. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 8 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction Consequently, aspiring to become an excellent business simply through an entirely inward looking management approach can be very illusive.

What’s more practical and indeed more assured way of better managing a business is to managing it along with the supply chain through appropriate strategic positioning, adequate structural configuration, collaboration, integration and leadership. The paramount importance of doing so does not derive from the theories or reasoning, rather it is withstood by the business performance improvement and market measured customer results.

It is the tangible benefits and success that it delivers makes the subject important. Supply chain management is also pervasive and ubiquitous. One can hardly find any aspect of business that has nothing to do with supply chain management.

Take an example of quality management – a very important part of today’s business management, and ask yourself a question: can you manage and improve the quality standard of your product or service measured by the end-consumer without managing the suppliers and buyers in the supply chain at all? Of course not. Business value creation is always a collective contribution from the whole involved supply chain.

1.2 Defining supply chains Ploughing through the plethora of literatures, one will come to realise that there are as many different definitions as many of those who cared to write about it. However, a broad conceptual consensus on the notion of Supply Chain (SC) and Supply Chain Management (SCM) is beyond anybody’s reasonable doubt. Based on that, the author would like to offer his definition of SC here and SCM in the next section.

In this definition, there are a number of key characteristics that have been used to portrait a supply chain. First, a supply chain is formed and can only be formed if there are more than one participating companies. Second, the participating companies within a supply chain normally do not belong to the same business ownership, and hence there is a legal independence in between.

Third, those companies are inter-connected on the common commitment to add value to the steam of material flow that run through the supply chain. This material flow, to each company, comes in as the transformed inputs and goes out as the value added outputs. Intuitively, one can imagine a supply chain as something resembles a “chain”, in which the “links” are the participating companies that are inter-connected in the value adding process (see figure 1).

The link on the upstream side of the material flow is the supplier’s supplier; and on the downstream side of the material flow is the customer. There is usually an OEM – Original Equipment Manufacturer in between. The OBM sometimes is represented by OBM – Original Brand Manufacturer, or sometimes simply the “focal company.” Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 9 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction Figure 1.

The basic Supply Chain model At the end of a supply chain is the product and/or service that are created by the supply chain for the end consumer. Thus, the fundamental reason of a supply chain’s existence is hinged on to serving the end-consumer in the market place. The degree of how well a supply chain can serve their consumer ultimately defines its competitive edge in the market place. It is understandable that in real-world a supply chain is much more complex than the one depicted in Figure1.

It is not really a “chain”, rather it is more like a “network”, when you consider that there are usually multiple suppliers and multiple customers for each participating companies in the chain. There are also possible nested chains within the chains. For example an engine manufacturing supply chain is a nested supply chain within the connected automobile supply chain. Depend on how would like to see the supply chain, there are similar but different names you may like to call the supply chain.

If you view a supply chain as basically a chain of value adding activities, you may like to call it “Value Chain”; if you perceive a supply chain as continuous demands originated from the consumer and stretched to upstream suppliers, you may like to call the supply chain the “Demand Chain”. Since the business connections between organisations are pervasive, how could one draw a boundary of a supply chain?

In order to answer this question, one needs to understand the four intrinsic flows of a supply chain. Material Flow: All manufacturing supply chains have material flows from the raw materials at the beginning of the supply chain to the finished products at the end of the supply chain. A furniture-making supply chain will have the wood cut down from forest at the beginning of its supply chain and home furniture at the end of supply chain.

The continuous flow of wood been transformed through the chain and end up to furniture ties the whole supply chain together and defines its clear boundary. A furniture supply chain can never be confused with a chocolate manufacturing supply chain because the material flows in between are clearly different and never will they cross with each other.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 10 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction Information Flow: All supply chain s have and make use of information flows. Throughout a supply chain there are multitude of information flows such as demand information flow, forecasting information flow, production and scheduling information flows, and design and NPI information flows. Unlike the material flow the information can run both directions, towards upstream and downstream alike.

Interestingly most of them are unique to the specific supply chain. The information of woman’s fashion clothing has no value to a motorbike supply chain. Any supply chain will have its own set of information flows that are vital to its existence which are often jealously protected against those of other supply chains. Finance Flow: All supply chain have finance flow. It is basically the money flow or the blood stream of a supply chain. Without it, a supply chain will surely demise.

However, for any supply chain, there is only one single source of such finance flow – the en-consumer. This understanding of single source of finance has led to a concept of “single entity” perspective of a supply chain, which is a very useful foundation for supply chain integration and collaboration. The distribution and sharing of this single financial resource fairly across a supply chain will allow for the better alignment between the contribution and reward for the participating companies.

Commercial flow: All supply chain represents a transactional commercial flow. This means that the material flow that run through the supply chain changes its ownership from one company to another, from supplier to buyer. The transactional process of buying and selling shifts the material flow’s ownership from the supplier to the buyer repeatedly until the end of the supply chain – the end-consumer.

This transactional commercial flow will only take place in a supply chain where there are more than one companies. On the other hand, if it is with an organisation there will be material flow, but no ownership change, and hence no commercial flow. The four flows described above not only better explain the function of the supply chain, but also define it more rigorously.

They represent four major areas of concerns and research activities in the supply chain management, which covers most of the known issues in the published literatures. 1.2 Customer Orientation Having understood the supply chain model, one may ask “Is the end-consumer a part of the supply chain?” Most people will say “Yes”, because consumer give the demand information; consumer provide the financial reward and so on.

But the author will argue that strictly speaking the end-consumer is NOT part of the supply chain; the supply chain only extend from the very raw material suppliers to the retailer (if that’s the last link in the supply chain before the end-consumer). There are number of fundamental reasons to support this argument. 1) First, all supply chain supplies, and every member of the supply chain supplies; but the consumer DON’T, it demands instead of supply.

The fundamental function of a supply chain is to supply; and the consumer is the recipient of the supply, but not a part of the supply. Supply chain’s existence is based on the existence of the demand from the consumer. Supply chain treats consumer as the object which it serves. If a supply chain contains the consumer within itself, then it will have no object to serve and no recipient to take the supply; and it will lose its purpose of existence.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 11 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction 2) Second, a supply chain adds value to the product (or transformed inputs), but the consumer DON’T. Consumer consumes the product and depletes its market value. Used goods are always cheaper than the new ones.

A supply chain and every member in it have the irrefutable duty to add values to the material flow, and they must learn how to improve the business and its management; but consumers will never need to do that. Their job is to use the money to vote which supply chain best satisfy their demand. 3) Third, a supply chain is always specialised and a consumer is always general.

A computer manufacturing supply chain only produces computers, whilst a consumer will have to buy food, clothing, and automobile as well as computers. Due to the extremely divers nature of consumer’s purchasing, to put the consumer as part of a supply chain will not be helpful in understanding the nature of a supply chain and may cause considerable confusion theoretically and logically.

Based on these three fundamental differences between the nature of supply chain and that of the consumer, it is more appropriate and less confusion if we separate the consumer away from the concept of the supply chain. This definition of supply chain without consumer will not deprive the immense benefits that consumer may contribute to the supply chain. How the end-consumer plays this pivotal role in the existence and the management of supply chain is the core notion of supply chain management.

The end-consumer to a supply chain is perhaps the most important factor of all as far as its management is concerned. Everything a supply chain does is driven by the needs and wants of the end-consumer. The contents of SCM are populated with the approaches, activities as well as the strategies that are aiming at delivering the products and services to satisfy the end-consumer. Therefore, it is safe to say that the SCM should be and has always been a customer centred management.

This reflects the typical characteristic of supply chain’s customer orientation. Linköping University – innovative, highly ranked, European Interested in Computer Science? Kick-start your career with an English-taught master’s degree. Click here!

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 12 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction Not only the end-consumer serves as the ultimate objective, it also provides vital information and practical assistance to the decision making in the process of supply chain management. The end-consumers needs and wants, where they are, how many they are and how much they can afford and etc.

give the supply chain manager some very precise guidance as how to achieve market responsiveness. It is therefore beyond the shadow of doubt that supply chain and its management have always been, still are, and will certainly continue to be customer oriented. This customer orientation gives the fundamental reason and purpose of its existence.

It also ensures that supply chain management has to be a system perspective based management approach that engages every participating member of the supply chain to align to the customer orientation. 1.3 Defining Supply Chain Management Defining the supply chain management can be both dead easy and extremely difficult. It is dead easy because it is so widely known and widely practiced in almost all businesses. There is hardly a need to teach the “A, B, C” again.

It is also extremely difficult because the definition must capture all what supply chain management in practice has reached far and wide. As an attempt, the author proffers the following definition: This definition squared out the nagging confusion between organisational business management and supply chain management. Rarely any aspect of organisational business management is not related to or influenced by the external firms in the supply chain.

Thus the best way to manage the business is to take into consideration and engage with the external organisations in the decision making in order to achieve the ultimate business objectives – that means supply chain management. In other words, trying to identify a set of supply chain management activities that is not or nothing to do with any known business management activities would futile.

The inception of the supply chain management concept did not create a new set of functional activities that has never been carried out before. What it created is a new way of understanding on how the business activities might be better carried out. The supply chain management defined as such has already elevated the modern business management concept from the organisational focused domain to the supply chain focused system giving rise to more effectiveness in achieving the strategic objectives.

Today’s competition is no longer seen as the company against the company but the supply chain against the supply chain. Supply chain management is therefore a new perspective towards the old activities.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 13 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Introduction This definition effectively explains why supply chain management can be done in such vastly diverse ways; why apparently completely different management activities can often be called supply chain management; why the same traditional management function is now been entitled as supply chain management; and so on.

The answer is simply that because we start view the management issues and taking actions from the supply chain perspective. This definition certainly gives the supply chain management concept a ubiquitous and pervasive nature. But, that does not mean that there is nothing uniquely identifiable on its own. One can still identify some practically very useful conceptual components of the supply chain management.

Any supply chain management practice and activities is captured by the three conceptual components: Supply Chain Configuration; Supply Chain Relationship; and Supply Chain Coordination. Figure 2. Supply Chain Management conceptual model • Supply Chain Configuration is about how a supply chain is constructed from all its participating firms.

This includes how big is the supply base for OEM (original equipment manufacturer); how wide or narrow is the extent of vertical integration (which is the single ownership of consecutive activities along the supply chain); how much of the OEM’s operations are outsourced; how the downstream distribution channel is designed; and so on. It is also known as supply chain architecture. The decision on supply chain configuration is strategic and at a higher level.

• Supply Chain Relationship is about inter-firm relationships across the supply chain albeit the key focus of relationship is often around the OEM and its first tier suppliers and first tier customers and the relationship in between. The type and level of the relationship is determined by the contents of inter-organisational exchanges.

The relationship is likely to be “arm’s length” if they only exchanged the volume and price of the transaction; on the other hand, the relationship would be regarded as close partnership if the parties exchanged their vision, investment planning, NPI process and detailed financial information. The decision on supply chain relationship is both strategic and operational.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 14 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management • Introduction Supply Chain Coordination refers mainly to the inter-firm operational coordination within a supply chain. It involves the coordination of continuous material flows from the suppliers to the buyers and through to the end-consumer in a preferably JIM manner. Inventory management throughout the supply chain could be a key focal point for the coordination.

Production capacity, forecasting, manufacturing scheduling, even customer services will all constitute the main contents of the coordination activities in the supply chain. The decision on the supply chain coordination tends to be operational. There is, however, one thing in common amongst the three key supply chain management focuses. That is they all deal with the external organisation in the same supply chain, which makes the concept more supply chain rather than organisationally internal.

These concepts also tell us that supply chain management involves managerial decision making across strategic, tactic and operational levels – the pervasiveness. One may notice that all the major Operations Management text books will include a chapter or two on supply chain management, but that does not necessarily make the subject purely operational.

I joined MITAS because I wanted real responsibili� I joined MITAS because I wanted real responsibili� Real work International Internationa al opportunities �ree wo work or placements �e Graduate Programme for Engineers and Geoscientists Maersk.com/Mitas www.discovermitas.com M Month 16 I was a construction M supervisor ina cons I was the North Sea supe advising and the N he helping foremen advis ssolve problems Real work he helping International Internationa al opportunities �ree wo work or placements ssolve p Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 15 � for Engin Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 1.3 Global Supply Chain Operations Development Trends Another difficulty in understanding and defining supply chain and supply chain management is that it is never stand still and the subject has been continuously evolving since its inception in the early 1980s.

The continuous development is partly propelled by the changes of overall business environment and heightened competitions in the global market place. But partly it is influenced by the new understanding of the supply chain that they participate. There are number of early development trends that can be observed evidently. 1) From functional to process perspective. Business management used to see and take action on the functional silos in the business.

It was understandable that naturally the function is what seen to be the delivery part of the business. But, today with supply chain management concept managers can see their problems more from the process perspective, understanding that functions can only make sense if it is perceived from a supply chain process perspective. 2) From operational to strategic viewpoint.

At early years of applying supply chain management concept, managers tends to see it as another operational tactics that will help to reduce operational cost, such as purchasing function improvement and optimising the logistics operations. But, gradually more and more managers realised that the effective changes can only be achieved if the operational issues are addressed from the supply chain wide strategic viewpoint. Operational excellence can only be manifested through its strategic fit.

3) From single enterprise to extended enterprise. Enterprise management is now arguably displaced by the supply chain management, where the supply chain is by definition the extended enterprise. The long established enterprise centred management thinking was based on that the competition was raged between the organisations, thus it becomes obsolete as the competitions are now predominantly between the supply chains.

Management thinking over the extended enterprise produces a great deal ideas that single enterprise alone cannot. 4) From transactional to relationship based engagement. Business engagement between firms in the past was predominantly transaction based and cost driven. The merit of any purchasing and procurement of externally sourced materials and services was judged by the transactional measures such as price, volume and delivery terms.

But what’s now more of the practices in working with external organisations within the supply chain is so called relationship based engagement. This relationship approach does not abandon the transactional activities but put its decision baking on much wider consideration of knowledge exchange, long-term commitment, incentives and reward. 5) From local to regional, and from regional to global. Connections of supply network have over the last two decades grown from local to regional and to global.

Hardly any major enterprise and supply chains is not connected to some part of the world. You need to get out before you can get up. This trend is spurred by the lower cost of labour and materials in many parts of the world, as well as first mover advantages in setting up global market presence. The trends of supply chain development are not always positive and encouraging.

There is now enough evidence to support that supply chain risks are now continuously growing to the level that is higher than ever before; and supply chain integration still remains as the major management shortfall across all industrial sectors (PRTM Global supply chain trends report 2010-12). The task of managing and improving supply chain performances across all industrial sectors is only becoming tougher, not easier.

This calls for deeper and more thorough understanding of the challenges supply chains are facing. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 16 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning 2 Global Supply Chain Operations 2.1 Global Business Environment To date, our world market is dominated mostly by many well established global brands.

Over the last three decades, there have been a steady trend of global market convergence – the tendency that indigenous markets start converge on a set of similar products or services across the world. The end-result of the global market convergence is that companies have succeeded on their products or services now have the whole wide world to embrace for their marketing as well as sourcing.

The rationale of global market convergence lies partially in the irreversible growth of global mass media including Internet, TVs, radios, news papers and movies, through which our planet has become truly a small global village. Everybody knows what everybody else is doing, and everyone wants the same thing if it is perceived any good.

It also lies in the rise of emerging economic powers led by BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India and China), which has significantly improved the living standard and the affordability of millions if not billions of people. For organizations and their supply chains, the logic of going global is also clearly recognizable from economic perspective.

They are merely seeking growth opportunities by expanding their markets to wherever there are more potentials for profitmaking; and to wherever resources are cheaper in order to reduce the overall supply chain costs. Inter-organizational collaborations in technological frontier and market presences in the predominantly non-homogeneous markets can also be the strong drivers behind the scene.

One can also observe from a more theoretical perspective that the trends of globalization from Adam Smith’s law of “division of labour”. A global supply chain is destined to be stronger than a local supply chain because it takes the advantage of the International Division of Labour. Surely, the specialization and cooperation in the global scenario yields higher level of economy than that of any local supply chains.

Thus the growth of global supply chain tends to give rise to the need for more coordination between the specialized activities along the supply chain in the global scale. As the newly appointed Harvard Business School dean professor Nitin Nohria said “If the 20th century is American’s century, then the 21st century is definitely going to be the global century.” The shift of economic and political powers around world is all too visible and has become much more dynamic and complex.

But, one thing is certain that there will be significantly and increasingly more participation of diverse industries from all around the world into the global supply chain network; hence bringing in the influences from many emerging economies around the world. Their roles in the globally stretched network of multinational supply chains are going to be pivotal and will lead towards a profoundly changed competitive landscape.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 17 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning In such a global stage there are a number of key characteristics that global supply chains must recognize before they can steer through: • Borderless: National borders are no longer the limits for supply chain development in terms of sourcing, marketing, manufacturing and delivering. This borderless phenomenon is much beyond the visible material flows of the globalised supply chain.

It is equally strongly manifested in terms of invisible dimensions of global development such as brands, services, technological collaboration and financing. Evidently, the national borders are far less constrictive than they used to be. Arguable this is perhaps the result of technology development, regional and bilateral trade agreements, and the facilitation or world organizations such as WTO, WB, GATT, OECD, OPEC and so on.

• Cyber-connected: The global business environment is no longer a cluster of many indigenous independent local markets, but rather it emerged as an inter-connected single market through predominantly and growingly important cyber connections. For this reason, the inter-connection of our global business environment is almost “invisible”, spontaneous and less controllable and surely irreversible.

Globally stretched multinational supply chains would not be possible or even comprehensible without cybertechnology allowing large amounts of data to be transferred incredibly quickly and reliably. • Deregulated: Trade barriers around the world has been demolished or at least significantly lowered. Economic and free-trade zones around the world have promoted open and fair competition and created, albeit never perfect, a level playing field on the global stage.

Deregulation simplifies and removes the rules and regulations that constrain the operation of market forces. It has targeted more at the international trading and aiming for stimulating global economic growth. The typical deregulated regions are European Union, North America Free Trade Agreement zone; Associations of Southeast Asian Nations group and so on. Deregulation reduces government control over how business is done thus moving towards laissez-fair and free market system.

• Environmental Consciousness: Last decade has witnessed the growing concerns on the negative impact of business and economic development on the natural environment. The global movement towards green and more eco sustainable business strategies plays an important role in today’s global supply chain development. This is also driven by the actions of lawmakers and regulatory agencies, such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Governments of leading economies are increasingly involved in promoting greening activities in business, and formalize more legislation and regulation to place upon firms in the future. Carbon footprint is now a key performance measure of the sustainability for many global supply chains. • Social Responsibility: Along with that is a wider socio-economic impact.

Fair trade and business ethics become increasingly the key measures on business’s social responsibility, and the key factors for business decision making. Social pressure strikes at the heart of a company’s brand in the mind of the consumer. A significant group of consumers have begun making their purchasing decisions based on the supply chain’s ethical standard and social responsibility.

Global corporate citizenship and social responsibility forms yet another important business environmental factor that can make or break a business. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 18 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 2.2 Supply Chain Design and Planning Strategic Challenges Under such a changing global business environment, what are the new strategic and operational challenges?

At a macro level, there are at least five key strategic challenges that will have the long term and overall impact on the architecture as well the management process of the global supply chains. Those strategic challenges tend to be interrelated intricately and dynamically with one another. The magnitude of those challenges varies from industry to industry; and from time to time.

Market dimension Continuing demand volatility across the world market has hampered many supply chains’ ability to manage the responsiveness effectively. Demand fluctuation at the consumer market level poses a serious challenge to the assets configuration of supply chain, capacity synchronisation, and lead-time management. More often than not it triggers the ‘bullwhip effect’ throughout the supply chain resulting in higher operating cost and unsatisfactory delivery of products and services.

The root causes of the demand volatility in the global market are usually unpredictable and even less controllable. Economic climate plays a key role in overall consumer demand. The recent worldwide economic downturn has made many global supply chains over-capacitated, at least for a considerable period of time. Geo-political instability around the world has also contributed to the market volatility to certain industries.

Technology development and product innovation constantly creates as well as destroys the markets often in a speed much faster than the supply chain can possibly adapt. Emerging economies around the world are aggressively churning out products and services that rival the incumbent supply chains Implementation Web-enabled Applications Are you ready to do what matters when it comes to Technology?

Data Analytics Big Data IT Consultancy Technology SAP Information Management Social Business Cyber Crime Innovation Technology Advisory Java Enterprise Application CRM Enterprise Content Management SQL End-to-End Solution Cloud Computing in terms of quality and price, which lead to huge swings of market sentiment.

.NET Implementation Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 19 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Recent research shows that customer loyalty has significantly decreased over the last decade, adding to the concerns of market volatility. The development of internet based distribution channels and other mobile marketing medias has made it incredibly easier for consumers to switch their usual brands.

Many products are becoming more and more commoditized, with multiple competitors offering very similar features. With increased market transparency, many B2B and end customers simply shop for the lowest price, overlooking their loyalty to particular suppliers or products. A lack of robust forecasting and planning tools may have contributed to the problem, as companies and their suppliers frequently find themselves scrambling to meet unexpected changes in demand.

Technology dimension Technology and the level of the sophistication in applying the technology for competitive advantages have long been recognised as the key strategic challenges in supply chain management. This is even more so, when we are now talking about the supply chain development in a global stage. The key strategic challenges in the technological dimension are threefold. The first is the development lead-time challenge.

The lead-time from innovative ideas to testing, prototyping, manufacturing, and marketing has been significantly shortened. This is partially due to the much widened global collaboration on technological development and subsequent commercialisation and dissemination. The globally evolved technology development systems have created a new breed of elite group as the world technology leaders across different industries.

They capture the first mover advantages and made the entry barriers for new comers almost impossible to overtake. No doubt, there is a strategic challenge that global supply chain must create an ever ready architecture that can quickly embrace the new ideas and capitalise it in the market place. The second challenge comes from its disruptive power.

Harvard Business School professor Clayton Christensen published his book The Innovator’s Dilemma in May 1997, in which he expounded on what he defined as the disruptive technology. The basic message he tried to put across was that when new technologies causes great firms to fail, managers face the dilemma. Evidently, not all new technologies are sustaining to business, often they are competency-destroying.

The product or service developed through applying new innovative technologies may not be so much appreciated by the consumers. Consumers often are often not so eager to buy the ideas. They may not be so convinced that the value the technology created or the costs it added in. If you wait for other companies to test the market first, then you run a high risk of losing the first mover advantage and losing the market leadership. That’s the dilemma and that’s the challenge.

The third challenge lies in the supply chain network. The innovative ideas and new technologies usually emerge from a supplier or a contractor in the supply chain network. To convince the whole supply chain of the value adding or cost reduction is not guaranteed. Each supplier and contractor will have its own value stream and will make technology adoption decisions based on the needs of its own customers.

Innovative ideas that come up from subcontractors may be stifled due to the supply chain’s inability to coordinate value contribution between individual members and the whole supply chain. The cost and profit structures in the value network can also limit the attractiveness of an innovation. If profit margins are low, the emphasis will be on cost cutting across proven technologies, rather than taking the risk of the new technologies.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 20 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Finally from the technology evolution perspective, technology destroys as readily as it creates. The development of digital photography has literally destroyed the photo film manufacturing industries including many well known brands; LCD and Plasma technology also smashed the TV Tube (traditional screen component) manufacturing industry overnight.

This increased risk of technology disruption at the industrial scale is lot more formidable than the innovative dilemma Prof Christenson was talking about in his book. Nevertheless, there are some helpful supply chain strategies that can better prepare them for the eventuality.

Resource dimension From resource based perspective, global supply chain development is both motivated by dinging new resources around world and by make better use of its own already acquired resources to yield economic outputs. It comes as no surprises that one of the key strategic challenges in global supply chain development is about resource deployment.

The term resource in this context means any strategically important resources, including financial resource, workforce resource, intellectual resource, natural material resources, infrastructure and asset related resources, and so forth. Stretching supply chains’ downstream tentacles around the world opens the door for making good (more efficient) use of internal resources, i.e.

the same level of resources can now be used to satisfy much wider and bigger market in terms of volume, variety, quality and functions. However the internal resource or competence based strategy will also face more severe challenges on the global stage than in its own local or regional market. The challenges are not necessarily just from the indigenous market, but more likely they come from equally competitive incumbent multinationals and possible emerging ones alike.

Also more menacingly the internal based advantages can evaporate anytime when global business environment subjects fundamental changes. If it really matters, make it happen – with a career at Siemens.

siemens.com/careers Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 21 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Stretching the sourcing-end (supply side) of supply chain to the global market is a great strategy to acquire scarce resources, or any resources at a much lowered cost. The productivity and operational efficiency oriented strategy is often no match to the procurement focused strategy in measures of reducing the total supply chain cost.

No wonder many multinationals are actively debating on sourcing their workforce, materials and energy from overseas locations in order to significantly reduce the operation cost, which will then lead to more competitive market offerings. This resource sourcing strategy has been the prime drive for the surge of off-shoring and outsourcing activities all over the world.

However many longterm and short-term impacts of outsourcing and off-shoring are difficult to be fully understood from the outset, if at all possible. Thus it forms a key strategic challenge in global supply chain development. Time dimension Most of the key global supply chain challenges are time related, and it appears to be that they are becoming even more time related than ever before. Given that everything else is equal; the differences on time could make or break a supply chain.

When the new market opportunity emerges it is usually the one who gets into the market first reaps the biggest advantages. Competitions on many new electronic consumer products is largely about who developed it first and become the industry leader. From the internal supply chain perspective, the cost and core competences are all largely measured against time.

Inventory cost increase, if the materials do not move on quick enough; supply chain responsiveness is can be significantly influenced by the lead-time and throughput time. Indeed, one of the key supply chain management subject areas is about agility and responsiveness. That is basically defined as how fast the supply chain can respond to the unexpected and often quite sudden changes in market demand.

Understandably, in the increasingly fast moving global market place, developing and implementing an agile supply chain strategy makes sense. However, the tough challenges are usually not on making the decisions as to whether should the supply chain be agile or not. They are more on balancing the ‘cost to serve’.

In order to maintain a nimble footed business model, the supply chain may have to upgrade its facilities with investment, having higher than usual production and service capacities, or having high level of inventories. Then the question is would the resultant agility pay for the heightened supply chain costs. There is no fixed answer to this question, and it remains as a key challenge to supply chain managers.

The time measures on many operational issues have also been the major challenges for supply chain managers. Customer lead-time, i.e. from customer order to product delivery, is one of those challenges. Toyota claims that they can produce a customer specified vehicle with a fortnight – the shortest lead-time in the auto industry. This adds huge value to the supply chain in terms of customer satisfaction, cost reduction, efficiency and productivity.

But it could be a huge challenge, when the customers are all over the world and the productions sites and distribution logistics facilities are not well established. All the challenges in the three dimensions are, of course, interrelated and even interdependent with each other. A supply chain strategist must have a sound system view to understand the intricate relations of all factors in the whole supply chain and over the projection of long-term.

Those strategic challenges have undoubtedly given rise to the risk level of global supply chain development. It came as little surprise that the supply chain risk management, which will be discussed later in this book, is now one of the hot topics discussed in the academia and business circle alike.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 22 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 2.3 Supply Chain Design and Planning How Global Supply Chains Responded Knowing the challenges is one thing perhaps to begin with, but learning about how to face up to the challenges is quite another. Despite the plethora of literatures on supply chain management, there are still no universally agreed “one size fit all” recipes for managers to prescribe in order to survive the challenges.

Academic and empirical studies show there are at least five common approaches that supply chains have survived the global challenges. Collaboration “If you cannot beat them, you better join them.” A great deal of global supply chain management activities are not necessarily about competing against one another, rather it is more about collaboration and partnering. Inter-firm collaboration in supply chain management context is simply defined as working together to achieve a common goal.

The content of collaboration varies from project to project and from business to business. It may be a research and development collaboration which is aiming perhaps for a technological advancement or a new product design; or it could be a logistics operational collaboration where the aim is to reduce logistics lead-time and cost; it could also be marketing collaboration where the aim is to penetrate the market and increase sales.

So, the collaboration is usually mentioned when there is an area or a project the activities of the collaboration can be associated with. The parties that involved in the collaboration are often referred to as the partners or collaborative partners. There are a number of obvious reasons why collaboration is one of the most favourite supply chain management approaches.

• Sharing resources: collaboration between two firms helps to share the complementary resources between them, thus avoiding unnecessary duplication of the costly resources such as capital-intensive equipment, service and maintenance facilities, and distribution networks and so on. Information, knowledge and intellectual resources are also very common resources that are shared during the collaboration.

• Achieve synergy: collaboration of the two partnering firms will usually result in what is called ‘synergy.’ Synergy, in general, may be defined as two or more things functioning together to produce a result not independently obtainable. That is, if elements A and B are combined, the result is greater than the expected arithmetic sum A+B. In the context business collaboration or partnering, synergy is about creating additional business value that neither can achieve individually.

• Risk sharing: a properly constructed collaboration can help to mitigate the company’s market and supply risk significantly for both parties. Risk is the negative but uncertain impact on business, which is normally beyond control. By collaborating on investment and marketing, the negative impact of the supply chain risks can be borne by both parties and thus shared and halved.

• Innovation: collaboration in technology development and R&D partnering is particularly effective way to advance their competitive advantages through innovation in the technological frontier. The logic behind is perhaps that when people from different business working to gather, they start blend their knowhow and experience together, sparkling new innovative ideas.

In most of innovation training programmes one can always recognise one of steps of generating innovative ideas is to have brain storming across a multifunctional team. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 23 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Supply chain integration The nature of a supply chain is that it is usually a network which consists of a number of participating firms as its member.

For a global supply chain the network stretches many parts of the world, and the participating member firms of the network can be an independent company in any country around the world. Supply chains are therefore voluntarily formed ‘organisations’ with fickle loyalties and often antagonistic relations in between the member firms. Communication and visibility along the supply chain are usually poor. In other words, supply chains are not born integrated.

Supply chain integration therefore can be defined as the close internal and external coordination across the supply chain operations and processes under the shared vision and value amongst the participating members. Usually, a well integrated supply chain will exhibit high visibility, lower inventory, high capacity utilisation, short lead-time, and high product quality (low defect rate).

Therefore, managing supply chain integration has become one of the most common supply chain management approaches that can stand up to the global challenges. However, there is no supply chain that is strictly 100% integrated, nor any one that is strictly 0% integrated. It is about how much the supply chain is integrated from a focal company’s point of view.

To illustrate this degree of difference in supply chain integration, Frohlich and Westbrook (2001) suggested a concept of ‘Arc of Integration’ (Figure 3). A wider arc represents a higher degree of integration which covers larger extent of the supply chain, and a narrow one for a smaller extent. The issue about supply integration is particularly important when the supply chain is formed by the members around the globe. Figure 3.

Arc of integration (Source: Frohlich and Westbrook, 2001) Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 24 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Divergent product portfolio A conventional wisdom says that ‘don’t put all your eggs in one basket.’ It also makes sense in formulating a global supply chain development strategy. Translated into business management terminology, the wisdom is very similar to the ‘divergent product portfolio’ strategy.

Then it may make even more sense when the global market becomes the stage for the supply chain. Two key characteristics of global market are volatility and diversity. Develop divergent product portfolio will make the supply chain more capable of satisfying the divergent demand of the world market. Many leading multinational organisations have already been the firm believer of this strategy. They have developed a wide range of product or even business sector portfolio to cater for the market needs.

Virgin Group, General Electric, British Aerospace are just some well know examples. The divergent product portfolio strategy can also significantly mitigate the market risks that brought forth by the nature of global market volatility. If one product is not doing well, the supply chain can still be stabilised by others that do well. The shock of one single market at a particular time will not derail the overall business. In a long run, occasional market instabilities will ease off with each other.

So, the divergent portfolio works like a shock absorber and risk mitigating tool. At Navigant, there is no limit to the impact you can have. As you envision your future and all the wonderful rewards your exceptional talents will bring, we offer this simple guiding principle: It’s not what we do. It’s how we do it. Impact matters. navigant.com ©2013 Navigant Consulting, Inc. All rights reserved.

Navigant Consulting is not a certified public accounting firm and does not provide audit, attest, or public accounting services. See navigant.com/licensing for a complete listing of private investigator licenses.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 25 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Develop the “blue ocean strategy” Instead of going for the ‘head-on’ competition in the already contested ‘red sea’ a much more effective approach is to create a new market place in the ‘blue ocean’, which makes the competition irrelevant.

This is an innovative strategic approach developed by Prof. Cham Kim and Renee Mauborgne in 2005, and published in their joint authored book “Blue Ocean Strategy”. In the book, the authors contend that while most companies compete within such red oceans, this strategy is increasingly unlikely to create profitable growth in the future.

Based on a study of 150 strategic moves in many globally active supply chains over the last thirty years, Kim and Mauborgne argue that developing the ‘blue ocean strategy’ (as they coined it) has already been proven an effective response to the global challenges for many supply chains. Tomorrow’s leading supply chains will succeed not by battling competitors, but by creating ‘blue ocean’ of uncontested market space that is ripe for growth.

They have proved that one can face up to the challenges most effectively without actually doing so. Creating new market space is actually a lot easier than you think if you know how. Pursuing world class excellence: To weather the global challenges and to achieve long lasting business success often calls for one fundamental feat and that feat is world class excellence.

Almost all known world leading supply chains in all industrial sectors have somehow demonstrated that they have just been excellent in a multitude of performance measures. The world class excellence defines the highest business performance at a global level that stand the test of time. Only the very few leading edge organisations around the world truly deserve this title. But the title is not just a title. It is the fitness status that ultimately separates the business winners from losers.

To become a world class supply chain one need to excel in four dimensions. The first dimension is the operational excellence. All world class supply chain must have optimised operations measured in productivity, efficiency, cost effectiveness, quality, high standard of customer service and customer satisfaction. The second dimension is the strategic fit.

All world class supply chains must also ensure that excellent operations fit to the supply chain’s strategic objective and stakeholder’s interests; and the internal resources fit to the external market needs. The third dimension is the capability to adapt. Would class supply chains must be dynamic and able to adapt into to new business environment in order to sustain the success. The fourth dimension is the unique voice.

All world class supply chains needs to develop its own unique signature practices that render positive market results. Such internally unique practice coupled with positive market result is called unique voice. This dimension goes beyond benchmarking on best-practices; it creates best-practices (Lu 2011).

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 26 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 2.4 Supply Chain Design and Planning Current Trends in Global SCM Many reliable management researches and surveys conducted in recent years have come to a broad consensus that some significant development trends are shaping and moving today’s global supply chains.

The following trends are mainly based on and adapted from the PRTM 2010 Survey results with the author’s own interpretation and analysis to facilitate student learning. Trend 1: Supply chain volatility and market uncertainty is on the rise. Research survey shows that continued demand volatility in most of global markets is a major concern to the executives of supply chains.

Significantly more than any other challenges to supply chain flexibility, more than 74% of the surveyed respondents ticked the demand volatility and poor forecasting accuracy as the increasing major challenges to supply chain flexibility. Apparently, few companies have strategies in place for managing volatility in the years ahead let along implementing it. The lack of flexibility to cope with the demand change is increasingly a management shortfall.

In the path of economic recovery, this shortfall could well be the trigger for bullwhip effect. The fast development of cyber market and mobile media has given rise to the market visibility leading to high level of market transparency. B2B customers and consumers have found it a lot easier to shop for alternative lower price or better value. The switching cost is evaporated rapidly, and so is the customer loyalty, which adds salt to the injury.

The only known approaches to deal with the trend of increased volatility are improving forecasting accuracy and planning for flexible capacity throughout the supply chain. Best performing companies tends to improve supply chain responsiveness through improving visibilities across all supply chain partners. On the downstream side, companies are now focusing more on deepening collaboration with key customers to reduce unanticipated changes.

Trend 2: Market growth depends increasingly on global customers and supplier networks The research survey has shown a positive growing trend in international customers and international suppliers in more international locations. As a result, more than 85% of companies expect the complexity of their supply chains to grow significantly at least for the coming year.

The immediate implication of this trend is that the supply chain will have to produce higher number of products or variants to fulfil the customer expectations, albeit this may vary slightly for different geographical regions. In the main, the pattern of global supply chain is going to be more complex in terms of new customer locations, market diversity, product variants, and demand volatility.

On the supply side, the trends indicated that a more dynamic supply networks stretching far and wide globally. Managing those suppliers, developing them and integrating them become more a critical challenge than ever before. Nearly 30% of respondents expect the in-house manufacturing facilities will decline and to be replaced by outsourced and off-shored international contractors.

Similarly nearly 30% of respondents expected a decline in the number of strategic suppliers to the OEM (original equipment manufacturer) in order to achieve more closely integrate the supply chain for higher collaborated value adding. This will result in more consolidated supply base. This is more evident in North America and Europe, but significantly less so in Asia where expansion of supply network is more of the case.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 27 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Trend 3: Towards more cost-optimised supply chain configurations Survey respondents seemed confident that they will be able to deliver substantial gross margin improvements over the next couple of years. However the gains will not come from price increases, but from reductions of end-to-end supply chain costs.

Globalising supply chain operations and outsourcing specific functions are viewed as critical for controlling costs. It came as no surprise that outsourcing is on the rise across many industrial sectors around the world. Companies are taking advantages of lower costs in emerging markets and increasing their flexibility of their own supply chain. The functions that will see the greatest increase in outsourcing are product development, supply chain planning and shared services.

However, globalisation does not seem to have reduced process and management costs. In fact those hidden costs could be on the rise when supply chain becomes more global if not careful. Leading companies understand the impact of those hidden costs and are taking aggressive steps to identify and manage them. Many are embracing new concepts like Total Supply Chain Cost Engineering, an integral approach to calculating and managing total cost across all supply chain functions and interfaces.

Rigorous cost optimisation across the end-to-end supply chain – from order management, sourcing, and manufacturing to logistics and transportation – are critical for success.

> Apply now redefine your future - © Photononstop AxA globAl grAduAte progrAm 2015 axa_ad_grad_prog_170x115.indd 1 Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 19/12/13 16:36 28 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Trend 4: Risk management involves end-to-end supply chain To date, risk has become an increasingly critical management challenge across the global supply chains.

According to the research survey participants, new demands from their customers have played a key role in this development. Dealing with cost pressures of their own, many customers have increased their efforts in asset management and have started shifting supply chain risks, such as inventory holding risks, upstream to their suppliers. This approach, however, merely shifts risks from one part of the supply chain to another but not reduces it for the whole supply chain.

In fact, between 65% and 75% respondents believe that supply chain risks can only be most effectively mitigated by the end-to-end supply chain approaches. These end-to-end supply chain practices include advanced inventory management, joint production and material resource planning, improved delivery to customers and so forth. Leading companies are taking an end-to-end approach in managing risk at each node of the supply chain.

To keep the supply chain as lean as possible, they are taking a more active role in demand planning, which ensures they order only the amount of material needed to fill firm orders. Firms are also limiting the complexity of products that receive late-stage customisation. Leading companies mitigate inventory-related risks by shifting the responsibility for holding inventory to their suppliers and, furthermore, by making sure finished product is shipped immediately to customers after production.

Trend 5: More emphasis on supply chain integration and empowerment Little can be achieved without appropriate management approaches that truly integrated across all functions throughout the supply chain and empowered them to take bold action. However, approximately 30% mention the lack of integration between supply chain functions like product development and manufacturing.

Integrated supply chain management across all key functions still seen to be a myth, with many procurement and manufacturing executives making silo optimisation decisions. Nearly one-fourth of survey respondents point to their organisations’ inability to make concerted actions and coordinated planning to respond to the external challenges.

This could be a surprise to many that would believe after so much has been talked by so many for so long on the supply chain integration, little has been achieved in practice. Whilst almost all the survey participating companies have supply chain department, many of them failed to empower their supply chain managers to take leading roles in business transformation.

Leading companies understand that breakthrough improvements are not possible unless the decisions made are optimal for all supply chain functions. For this reason, they have already taken steps to integrate and empower their supply chain as a single resource under one joint responsibility. These firms are making sure the organisation has a strong end-to-end optimization, and are integrating supply chain partners up and downstream.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 29 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning 3 Supply Chain Design and Planning One of the important issues in supply chain management is to design and plan out the overall architecture of the supply chain network and the value adding flows that go through it.

This means that managers should step back and looks at the supply chain as a whole and formulates strategies and processes that maximise the total supply chain value-adding and minimises the total supply chain costs. The key contents of such architecture design and planning include configuration, extent of vertical integration, strategic outsourcing, location decisions, capacity planning, and dealing with bullwhip effect.

There are also other aspects of the design and planning such as relationship posture which will be covered in a separated chapter. 3.1 Supply Chain Configuration Supply chain configuration represents how the participating company members of the chain are connected with each other to deliver the product or service to the end customer.

To an OEM, how many suppliers it uses, how the suppliers are grouped or categorised or tiered, where do they geographically located, the ownership and independence of the suppliers, the choice of distribution channels are all the configuration issues for the supply chain. The fact is that companies do have the choice to configure their supply chains in the way they believe are most appropriate and beneficial. However there is no single ‘best’ configuration for all supply chains.

It all depends on the industry sectors, market environment, stages of product cycle and so on. The evolution of global multinationals’ network could be an interesting example to understand the relevance of supply chain configuration.

In the pre-second World War era of 1930s and 1940s, the mostly European multinational companies including Unilever, Royal Dutch/Shell, ICI, and Philips were the pioneers of ‘global supply chain’ development and created their tentacles such as subsidiaries all over the continent. Each national subsidiary was permitted a high degree of operational independence from the parent company; understanding its own product development, manufacturing and marketing. It is a semidetached ‘loose’ configuration.

This ‘hands-off ’ approach was a response to the conditions at the time when international transport and communication were slow, costly and unreliable; and the national markets were highly differentiated. During the 1950s and 1960s, the world appears to be dominated mostly by the American multinationals, including GM, Ford, IBM, Coca-Cola, Caterpillar, Procter & Gamble. The configuration of those multinationals with their wholly owned subsidiaries took an evolved form.

Although the subsidiaries were operated with high degree of autonomy from the parent company, the US based parent companies occupies a dominant position in terms of strategic guidance and resource support. It was partly because at that time the US was the largest and most affluent market in the world. The US base acted as the source of new products and process technology. The primary competitive advantage of the subsidiaries was the ability to utilise the resource.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 30 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning The 1970s and 1980s saw the Japanese challenges all over the world. Her multinationals like Toyota, Honda, Matsushita, NEC, and Sony completed a long journey from exporting to globalisation and established a concrete market bases. A distinguished configuration feature of the Japanese multinationals was their pursuit of global strategies from the centralised domestic bases.

While overseas subsidiaries were initially for sales, distribution, and customer support. By building plants of unprecedented scale to service growing world demand Japanese companies were able to exploit substantial scale and experience advantage. Supply chain configuration can also be observed from the network relationship perspective.

When the OEM forms its supply network through tiered suppliers and tiered distributor with medium and long term stability, it can be called the ‘Stable Network.’ When the OEM does not have many of those long term tiered suppliers and customers, but instead uses dynamic and mostly short term suppliers and distributors to achieve high level of operational flexibility and strategic agility, it can be called the ‘Dynamic Network.’ The two broad types of network configuration can be illustrated in figure x.

In comparison, the tiered stable network has more control over its suppliers and distributors’ operations than the dynamic network. An unexpected misunderstanding in the dynamic network may result in unrecoverable product defects. Along with it, there is higher risk in operational cost control and quality standard.

However, the dynamic network is much more flexible than stable network in that it can quickly form a new network in the supply market to cater for the changed demand both in volume and in variety. It also has a better ability to upgrade technology and foster innovative processes. Which network configuration is better? It all depends on the objectives and desired characteristics of the network in the business context.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 31 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 3.3 Supply Chain Design and Planning Extent of Vertical Integration Much of the supply chain design is determined by the extent of vertical integration. Vertical integration is defined as the single ownership of consecutive activities along the supply chain. It must not be confused with the concept of supply chain integration.

A well integrated supply chain may not have a large extent of vertical integration (see definition of supply chain integration in section 2.3). If an OEM does not have ownership of its suppliers and customers, it is regarded as having a narrow span of vertical integration. On the other hand if it owns a number of tiers of suppliers and customers, it is regarded as having a large extent of vertical integration.

Obviously it could also be a forward integrated one or backward integrated one as shown in figure 4. Figure 4. The extent of vertical integration In the past four years we have drilled 89,000 km That’s more than twice around the world. Who are we? We are the world’s largest oilfield services company1. Working globally—often in remote and challenging locations— we invent, design, engineer, and apply technology to help our customers find and produce oil and gas safely. Who are we looking for?

Every year, we need thousands of graduates to begin dynamic careers in the following domains: n Engineering, Research and Operations n Geoscience and Petrotechnical n Commercial and Business What will you be? careers.slb.com Based on Fortune 500 ranking 2011. Copyright © 2015 Schlumberger. All rights reserved.

1 Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 32 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning In 1930s, Ford Motor Corporation created vastly vertically integrated automobile manufacturing empire the industry had even seen before or since.

Instead of using independent suppliers and contractors to provide the materials and components for the Model T (one of Ford’s famous passenger car), Ford choose to produce them by itself through creating extended Ford owned manufacturing suppliers and taking over some small and medium sized suppliers. It also bought steel mills to produce steels which goes into many parts of the automobile; and glass mills which made window screens for the cars.

Ford also bought large pieces of land in Brazil and Southeast Asian countries to grow rubber trees that eventually supplied the rubber materials for making tyres. In the end Ford can proclaim that it did not really need any suppliers and everything built into his Model T is made by Ford. That story becomes the classical case of what today we call the vertical integration. Obviously, the choice of such large extent of vertical integration of Ford Corporation was for a purpose not by an accident.

Historian and academics believe, the purpose then was to exercise control, capture the profitability from the suppliers in the upstream of the supply chain, and obviously the market dominance. Such strategic configuration appeared to have fitted very well to the then business environment, when market demand in volume looked to be permanent, and low price was the definitive market winner. Ford’s sale reached peak. However, large extent of vertical integration has its own weaknesses.

It was very rigid in its asset deployment, product line modification and introduction, no flexibility in responding to demand changes (due to fixed production capacity). As Henry Ford once said “Our customers can have any coloured cars they want, so long as it’s black.” This was a statement that acknowledged the system’s rigidity and inflexibility.

In the same period, but on the contrary, the second largest American automobile company GM was pursuing a very different strategy on the extent of vertical integration. Under the leadership of Alfred Sloan (then CEO of GM), GM pursued a ‘full-line products’ strategy that aiming to produce a variety of models from small economical version to large luxury models; some models for family use other for business.

To illustrate his strategy, Sloan once put it: “We will build cars for every purse and purpose.” This is a statement of customer oriented supply chain flexibility. GM saw the market was changing; people will not be satisfied with one model or one colour. They demand variety, upgraded new versions and customisation.

To maintain and further develop the company’s flexibility and dynamism, GM not only had chosen to use the independent suppliers for many of its materials and components, it even created so called strategic profit unit within the vertically integrated part of the supply chain in order to maintain the drive for competitiveness. GM has never followed Ford to go anywhere near the complete vertical integration.

The relatively small extent of vertical integration had given GM the competitive advantage in satisfying the customer’s needs for variety. Soon GM’s sale surpassed Ford and became the world’s biggest auto-maker in term of volume. Its world leading position was kept until 2007 when Toyota took over became the biggest volume producer in the world. The above cases show that a supply chain’s extent of vertical integration has always had profound impact on its development.

To large extent a company’s strategy, operation and performance will depend on the right design of the supply chain configuration. Nevertheless, depending on the nature of industry, product lifecycle and competitive environment, the architecture design of supply chain can vary significantly.

Generally speaking, process based industry such as oil industry and chemical industry tends to be more vertically integrated; and the technology intensive electronics industry tends to be less vertically integrated.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 33 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 3.4 Supply Chain Design and Planning Outsourcing and Offshoring On the opposite direction of vertical integration is vertical disintegration where the supply chain comprises of many independent participating members and the OEM does not have a large extent of vertically integrated consecutive operations.

In fact for a vertically disintegrated supply chain, considerable part of the OEM’s operations are outsourced to the independent external suppliers in order to achieve maximised value adding and minimised total cost for the supply chain. Hence, like the vertical integration, outsourcing is also a supply chain architecture design issue. Outsourcing or strategic outsourcing is commonly known as the “make-or-buy” decision.

Organisations may want to contract some of its in-house operations such as design, manufacturing and marketing to its external suppliers. Most often such decisions to ‘buy’ the operation instead of ‘make’ itself is aiming at a reduced cost. If a Chinese organisation can produce the same components at a fraction of the usual cost, it will surely attract many OEMs to outsource the production of the components to it.

But it is also possible, that if some companies, say in India, may have much better capability of developing the state-of-the-art IT software it makes sense to outsource the software development operations to them in order to gain the supply chain value adding. The decision and processes of moving any strategically significant operations out to the external suppliers is called outsourcing. There are two points to clarify from the definition.

First, outsourcing is not just a decision of make or buy, but also a process that including indentifying the potential suppliers, contractual negotiation, regular evaluation and review of the outsourced operation. Second, not all operations that carried out by the external suppliers are suitable to be classified as outsourcing; only the strategically significant operations can be classified as outsourcing.

For example, to a manufacturing supply chain, outsourcing some key components manufacturing operations is strategically significant; but the external catering service supply used by the same company is not. That’s why outsourcing is often interchangeably called strategic outsourcing.

Apart from maximising the value adding and minimising the total cost discussed above, outsourcing has many other potential benefits which could form the prime motive for the decision makers: • Focus on and further developing the core competences • Further differentiated competitive edge • Increasing business flexibility, thus supply chain flexibility • Improved supply chain responsiveness • Raise the entry barrier through focused investment • Enhanced ROI or ROE through downsizing the fixed asset Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 34 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Case examples of outsourcing are all around us.

Dell is a computer manufacture. In order to develop its strategic competitiveness in customised product configuration, assemble to order, and distribution channel transformation, it decided to put its strategic emphasis on product design and downstream services. To this end they decided to outsource most of its manufacturing operations to Taiwan but retain the design and also vertically integrated downstream channels.

Another example is the Benetton Group which is a leading edge garment supply chain in the world. It has the presence in over 120 countries. Its core business is fashion apparel. But, 80% of its manufacturing operation is outsourced to thousands of independent small manufactures. This helped the Benetton group to reduce its manufacturing cost, synchronise the supply chain capacity with the fluctuated market demand, and alleviate the bullwhip effects.

From an OEM perspective the supply chain is less vertically integrated if more operations are outsourced. Similarly, less outsourcing means higher level of vertical integration. Across most of the manufacturing industries around world, the recent decades have seen a clearly increased level of outsourced activities, and thus the reduced extent of vertical integration for most of the supply chains.

This is largely due to the continuous growth of global market volatility which drives the supply chains to become more flexible and agile, and the less vertically integrated supply chain offers precisely that flexibility. Another closely related concept in supply chain architecture design is called ‘offshoring’. Offshoring is defined as moving the on-shore operations to offshore locations in order to take the advantages of local resources, and to reduce operating cost or create market presence.

However offshoring does not necessarily mean outsourcing, especially when the ownership of the off-shored operation remains unchanged. There has been no outsourcing taken place. The inter-connection of the two concepts can be illustrated in figure 5. STUDY. PLAY. The stuff you'll need to make a good living The stuff that makes life worth living NORWAY. YOUR IDEAL STUDY DESTINATION.

WWW.STUDYINNORWAY.NO FACEBOOK.COM/STUDYINNORWAY Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 35 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Figure 5. Outsourcing vs. off-shoring The types of outsourcing business can be broadly observed in three categories.

• Business process outsourcing (BPO) -- Marketing / call centre outsourcing -- R & D process outsourcing -- Engineering process outsourcing (EPO) -- HR and recruitment process outsourcing -- Knowledge process outsourcing (KPO) • Business function outsourcing -- Financial auditing -- IT services -- Logistics services • Facility and man power outsourcing -- Capital equipment leasing -- Free length experts hiring Outsourcing is relatively simple to understand as a concept, but is difficult to implement in practice.

The debate surrounding the outsourcing decisions can be lengthy and complicated. The decision often will involve many factors from all levels of management and are intricately inter-related. It is therefore recommended that managers should set up and follow an appropriate process to make the outsourcing decisions and execute the decisions.

Here is a set of common steps of outsourcing processes: Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 36 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning 1) Understand competitive environment 2) Clarify the strategic objectives and processes 3) Analysing the market needs 4) Identify internal resources and competencies 5) Make or buy decision making 6) Identifying strategic suppliers 7) Deciding on the relationships 8) Performance evaluation and reviewing To give managers some hands-on support in outsourcing decision making.

Many tools have been developed by the academics and practitioners alike. They are very useful to get the managers started to create tools or frameworks that tailored to their own business cases. Those tools clarify the decision criteria, visualise the decision progress, communicate the ideas, and document the decisions process. Two of those tools are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7. Figure 6.

The logic decision tool for out sourcing (adopted from Nigel Slack 2005) Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 37 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Figure 7. the matrix decision tool for outsourcing (from Abbetti 1997) We ask you WHERE DO YOU WANT TO BE? TomTom is a place for people who see solutions when faced with problems, who have the energy to drive our technology, innovation, growth along with goal achievement.

We make it easy for people to make smarter decisions to keep moving towards their goals. If you share our passion - this could be the place for you. Founded in 1991 and headquartered in Amsterdam, we have 3,600 employees worldwide and sell our products in over 35 countries.

For further information, please visit tomtom.jobs Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 38 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Nevertheless, outsourcing like many other management activities is not without any risks. Far from it, the biggest concern of outsourcing is perhaps the risk that it brings about.

• Negative impact on company’s personnel • Loss control over key strategic design task, sub-system or component, resulting in negative impact on the company’s competitiveness.

• Could creating tomorrow’s competition • Risk of severe business disruption due to failed supply from single sourced suppliers • Tactical, short term approach to outsourcing may inhibits continuous improvement and long term investment • Intellectual property right risks • Foreign currency exchange risk if involves overseas suppliers Therefore, an outsourcing decision and its executions must be regularly reviewed and assessed against those risks strategically.

The review is essential because the changing business environment could easily make the originally right decision no longer justifiable. When the capital or financial circumstance changes like the one in the economic downturn, the outsourcing decision may have to be revised accordingly. Internal development of technologies and technical competences could also affect the outsourcing decisions.

3.5 Location Decisions The choice of geographical locations for supply chain operations is another important decision area for supply chain design and planning. Location decision is about the geographical positioning of the supply chain functions (such as assembly and distribution). It is normally done for the purpose of better serving the customers and further reducing the operational cost in the supply chain. Clearly, not all the locations are suitable for the supply chain operations.

But one thing is assured that when changing a location, many business-related factors change along with it. That makes the location change a powerful management instrument. Without doubt, a location decision will have profound impact on labour cost, material cost, taxation, currency exposure, financial and legal regulations and so on. These will further lead toward the significant changes in business outcomes, supply chain performance, and even environmental consequences.

It is important to understand that the operational considerations for the location decisions are not enough for the supply chain location design. Operational considerations for choosing a location are still valid and useful, but they are mainly the measures of the operations costs from many different dimensions. The operational location design, for example will take into account of multiple factors on the supply side of operations as well as on the demand side of operations as shown in figure 8.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 39 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Figure 8. factors influence the operational location decisions. However the location design for the whole supply chain will mainly consider two aspects of the whole supply chain. The single operation’s location decision has to be made in conjunction with the other operations’ locations decisions.

In other words it is the combined effect of all locations together that matters for the supply chain. It has been well documented that the total supply chain cost consists broadly two components: the physical cost and market cost (as shown in figure 9). Figure 9. Supply chain total cost The physical cost measures the supply chain operational efficiency as a whole.

It looks at all the involved cost that are necessary for the supply chain to transform the raw materials to the end products for the consumer. It includes the production cost, logistics cost, material cost, labour cost, taxation cost, energy cost and so on. The market cost looks at all the loss or cost incurred by the inappropriate supply chain market mediation.

If a supply chain failed to produce the products that are the right quantity for the market at the season, delivered to the right location where customers find it convenient to access to, with right quality and functions that they expect, at the right prices that they are willing to pay for, the supply chain will make loss either on unsold products or unsatisfied customers. measured by the product delivery process (PDP) cost in general.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 40 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning The locations decision for the supply chain, therefore, will have profound impact on both components of the supply chain cost, which in turn give rise to its importance in the supply chain design and planning.

However, in practice, due to the complexity of many factors involved, making a decision could be difficult; or rather to justify the merit of one decision over another could be very tricky. To facilitate managers to make such decision, I would suggest to use the common weighted scoring method as shown in figure 10. Figure 10. the weighted scoring method. (source: Slack et.al. 2006) Step 1 Identifying the criteria which will be used to evaluate the various locations.

Obviously, the criteria what are chosen must serve the strategic intention of the decision maker, and depend on the specific circumstances surrounding the location.

Find and follow us: http://twitter.com/bioradlscareers www.linkedin.com/groupsDirectory, search for Bio-Rad Life Sciences Careers http://bio-radlifesciencescareersblog.blogspot.com John Randall, PhD Senior Marketing Manager, Bio-Plex Business Unit Bio-Rad is a longtime leader in the life science research industry and has been voted one of the Best Places to Work by our employees in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Bring out your best in one of our many positions in research and development, sales, marketing, operations, and software development. Opportunities await — share your passion at Bio-Rad! www.bio-rad.com/careers Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 41 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Step 2 Establish the relative importance of each criterion through discussion and brain storming. Then assign the weighting factors to each of them.

The total sum of the weighting scores must equal to 100, thus the scores will conveniently represent the proportion of the weight in term of percentage. Step 3 Rate each of the alternative locations against the criteria based on a defined scale. The scale could be between 1 to 9 or 0 to 100, where 1 or 0 represent the worst possible score and 9 or 100 the best. The scoring is normally subjective and hence it is more reliable if a group of people join the scoring together.

Step 4 Multiply the weighting allocated to each criterion by the score in each location. Then for each location the overall score becomes the sum of (score for each criterion x weight for each criterion). The highest overall scored location is regarded as the most appropriate one. 3.6 Capacity Planning Business capacity planning is a big subject on its own. What I am going to talk about is the capacity related planning issues for supply chain architecture design.

If one observes the supply chain from the spectrum of capacities of each and every participating members, then an usually uneven capacity ‘landscape’ emerges. The question then is that which form of the landscape is the most beautiful one for the supply chain. The answer to this question surely cannot come from one company’s capacity planning, as the landscape is formed along with others.

This means supply chain capacity planning differs from organisational capacity planning in that it is coordinated endeavour. One can consider a single column supply chain with n (number) participating members. Each member has a known capacity Ci.

Then a relevant question here would be ‘what is the capacity of the whole supply chain?’ The answer to this question is undoubtedly “the minimum of all the known capacities Ci.” Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 42 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning One can imagine a supply chain as a piece of water pipe with different diameters at different sections.

The overall flow of the pipe, which represents the total capacity of the supply chain, depends on the smallest diameter section. In the situation of networked tiered supply chain structure, the overall capacity of the supply chain becomes the double layered minimum. For each tier i the overall capacity is ; and the whole supply chain’s capacity becomes. This capacity modelling analysis reveals a capacity bottleneck problem.

Thus, to resolve the supply chain capacity planning problem, the key is to identify and open up the capacity bottleneck. To work on the other links of the supply chain, which do not form the bottleneck, is unnecessary and futile as it will not affect the total capacity of the supply chain. However, when one bottleneck capacity has been increased, logically the next smallest capacity link will become the bottleneck instead; and it will then become the focus of capacity management subsequently.

There are already well established theories on the bottleneck problems, called ‘the theory of constraint’. In supply chain management, not only the capacity planning can apply the theory of constraint, so does the quality management, technology management, lead-time management, because every part of supply chain do have bottlenecks big or small in theory at least. To carry out the capacity planning in real-world supply chain, however, one needs to deal with it in three levels.

The first is the company’s internal capacity planning and management, which could be understood as the internal supply chain capacity management. The second level is the company’s external capacity coordination and synchronisation with the other members of the same supply chain, which can also be understood as the supply chain’s internal capacity planning.

The third level is the supply chain’s capacity responsiveness to the market demand changes, which can be understood as the capacity synchronisation between the supply chain and the customer demand. At the level 1 Managers will have to manage the company internal capacity synchronisation to achieve the capacity planning objectives.

This is because the desired capacity for the supply chain will eventually to be executed and implemented by each and every individual participating member of the supply chain. Thus for an organisation to achieve supply chain capacity planning, it must also be able to manage and synchronise the organisational internal capacities. This simply means that each functional silo will need to be coordinated with each other to avoid bottlenecks or over-capacity throughout.

This also means to make use of the safety inventories, manage smaller batch sizes and keep synchronised flows of materials. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 43 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning At the level 2 The key to achieved optimised capacity for a supply chain lies in its external synchronisation. The need for synchronise the capacities of each participating member is very simple.

It is to reduce and eliminate the waste incurred by the redundant capacities and to eliminate possible risks of short supply due to the bottlenecks. However, when it comes to actually achieving these supply chain wide capacity synchronisation, difficulties cannot be underestimated. First, a truly synchronised capacity can only be achieved when the involving members are strategically aligned and operationally integrated with each other.

Second, to achieve a synchronised capacity for the supply chain, the participating organisation may have to re-structure its assets and even make some capital investment; without a committed long term close partnership, such capital investment and asset re-deployment is unlikely to be achieved swiftly. Third, capacity synchronisation can only be a result of matured, culturally embedded and technically compatible operating systems across the supply chain.

At the level 3 The whole supply chain’s capacity must be synchronised with the market demand changes, and market demand change is often unknown or uncertain. Forecasting has long been used to assist the planning of the supply chain’s capacity but with limited successes. The credential of the analytical forecasting methods has not lived to its promises. As the result forecasting is either lucky or wrong.

Thus supply chain managers must resort to other more effective means of managing capacity synchronisation and ultimately the supply chain responsiveness. Last two decades have seen some encouraging progress in achieving high level of supply chain responsiveness. Today, supply chains are more active in creating and developing flexible capacity and flexible structure through outsourcing, vertical disintegration, virtual networks, and sharing and pooling resources, to name just a few.

But so far there is no single silver bullet discovered in this respect. The ways that industries manage their own capacity and responsiveness varies significantly. 3.7 Bullwhip Effect Capacity synchronisation has another major beneficial effect. It helps to alleviate the Bullwhip Effects in the supply chain, and the bullwhip effect is a very common phenomenon which has many negative impacts on the supply chain performances.

Understanding the bullwhip effect is therefore essential to the supply chain design and planning. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 44 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Bullwhip effect is also known as Forrester Effect as Jay Forrester (1961) showed that this was so by modelling supply chain mathematically and he called it industrial dynamics.

What happened basically is that when the small demand ripple in the market place is felt by the retailer at the end of the supply chain, the retailer will then start adjusting their orders to the wholesalers, and the wholesaler in turn will adjust its orders to the distributer, and the distributer to the factory. One would imagine when the factory receives the orders, it will have the equally small changes. Unfortunately, it could not be farther from the truth.

The small ripples have been significantly amplified stage by stage towards the upstream of the supply chain. When it reaches the factory or components manufacture the magnitude of fluctuation becomes unrecognisable. Figure 11 shows such changes.

Period 1 Period 2 Period 3 Retail Sales +10% -10% +10% Distribution Orders from Retail +17% -21% +32% Factory Orders from Distributor +30% -40% +48% Manufacturing Orders from Factory +45% -66% +80% Factory output +39% -60% +72 Figure 11, Example of bullwhip effect Such phenomenon has been observed repeatedly and reliably through all types of supply chains.

It is therefore appropriate to generalise it and theorise it as a universal ‘effect’ model, through which analysis and simulations can be applied. Basically, the bullwhip effect has three key characteristics. The first is oscillation. The demand, orders or inventories move up and down in an alternative pattern. The second is amplification. The magnitude of the alteration and fluctuation increases as it travels to the upstream end of the supply chain. The third is phase lag.

The cycle of peaks and troughs of one stage also tends to lag behind the one in the previous stage. Those characteristics can be clearly demonstrated by a supply chain simulation game. The Beer Game To illustrate the bullwhip effect in the supply chain dynamics, MIT Sloan School of Management created a so called Beer Distribution Game or just Beer Game. The Beer Game is the most widely played game in business schools around the world.

Many modified versions have also been developed and used extensively, but the one shown in this book is the original version. Despite the variation of the games played around world, the key features and the learning points remain largely the same.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 45 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning The game is a role playing simulation of a supply chain originally developed by Jay Forrester in the late 1950s to introduce students of the concept of system dynamics and its management. The game is played on a board portraying a typical supply chain (figure 12). The supply chain distributes beers and has four sectors: retailer, wholesaler, distributor, and factory.

One or two persons manage each sector. A deck of cards represents customer demand. Each week, customers demand beers from the retailer; the retailer fills the order out of inventory. The retailer in turn orders beer from the wholesaler, who ships the requested beer from the wholesale stocks. Likewise the wholesaler orders and receives beer from the distributor, who in turn orders and receives beer from the factory, and the factory produces beer.

At each stage there are order processing and shipping delays. Each link in the supply chain has the same structure. The D. E. Shaw group is hiring. You can do the math. Meet us on-campus this semester. Check out www.deshaw.com for more info. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 46 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Figure 12. The beer game board The players’ objective is to minimize the total cost for their company.

Inventory holding costs are usually set to $0.50 per case per week, and stock out costs (costs for having a backlog of unfilled orders) are $1.00 per case per week. The task facing each player is a typical example of the stock management problem. Players must keep their inventory as low as possible while avoiding backlogs. To fulfil the incoming orders the inventory has to be depleted, so the players must place replenishment orders in order to adjust their inventory to a desired level.

There is a delay between placing and receiving orders, just like in real-world business case, creating unfilled orders. There are also shipping delays that even the supplier despatched the goods it will take time to arrive, which is often the case in real-world. This results in the inability to adjust the inventory level quick enough to avoid the backlogs. Clearly, the game is far simpler than any real supply chain.

There are no random events – no machine breakdowns, and transport problems, or strikes. There are no capacity constraints or financial limitations. Above all the structure of the supply chain is visible to all, which is rarely the case in real life. Players can readily inspect the board to see how much inventory is in the transit or held by their teammates. The game is typically played with a very simple pattern of customer demand.

Starting from 4 cases per week for the first few weeks and then jumped to 8 cases per week and stays there until the end. Despite the apparent simplicity of the game, people do extremely poorly. For most of the first time player average costs are typically an astonishing 10 times greater than optimum. Figure x shows the typical results of the game. In all cases customer orders are essentially constant except for the small step increase near the start.

In all cases the response of the supply chain is unstable. The oscillation, amplification and phase lag observed in real supply chains are clearly visible in the displayed result. In the period of 20-25 weeks, the average amplification ratio of factory production relative to customer order is a factor of 4. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 47 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning Figure 13. Typical results of the Beer Game (Sterman, 2001).

Most interesting, the patterns of behaviour generated in the game are remarkably similar. Starting with the retailer, in the 20 weeks or so, inventories decline throughout the supply chain, and most players developed a backlog of unfilled orders (negative net inventory). In response, a wave of orders moves through the chain, growing larger at each stage. Eventually, factory production surges, and inventories throughout the supply chain start to rise.

But inventory does not stabilize at the cost-minimising level near zero. Instead, inventory significantly overshoots. Players responded by slashing orders, often cutting them to zero for extended periods. Inventory eventually peaks and start decline again. These behaviours are all the more remarkable because there is no oscillation in customer demand. The oscillation arises as the consequence of the players activities.

Although plays are free to place orders in any way they wish, the vast majority behave in a remarkably uniformed fashion. The causes of the bullwhip effect are systemic. They are a combination of structured delays both in order processing and shipping, over ordering and ignoring the incoming good in the pipeline, under ordering and failing to see the build-up of downstream demand, panic and over react, lack of coordination, poor forecasting and so on.

In real-world supply chain operations, there will be even more factors that worsening the bullwhip effect, such as batching, facility breakdown, poor maintenance, inappropriate scheduling and communication, poor capacity coordination, market disruptions and many more. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 48 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Supply Chain Design and Planning How to alleviate the bullwhip effect? There is no single cure-all recipe.

But there are some commonly agreeable countermeasures to the bullwhip effect: • Improve information sharing through EDI (electronic data interchange), POS (point of sale systems), and web-based IS (information systems). • Reducing batch ordering • Coordinating capacity and production planning • Apply appropriate safety stocks to insulate the oscillation • Reducing inventory level through JIT (just in time), VMI (vendor managed inventory), QR (quick response).

All those approaches must be executed cohesively in an integrated manor. A bullwhip effect proof supply chain will also call for a very high degree of inter-organisational collaboration by which systematic coordination in capacity planning, inventory management, cost-to-serve, lead-time reduction and responsiveness can be effectively achieved. Need help with your dissertation? Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your topic area.

Find out what you can do to improve the quality of your dissertation!

Get Help Now Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 49 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management 4 Lean Supply Management 4.1 Origins of the Lean Manufacturing Over the span of circa 40 years time, from the beginning of 1950s to the end of 1980s, Toyota led Japanese automotive industry created a unique production / manufacturing system, which brought the industry from the ruins of the 2nd World War to the biggest automobile exporter in the world.

That system was known as the Toyota Production System (TPS), now more commonly known as lean manufacturing. The term ‘lean’ was first coined in a large scale research programme called IMVP (International Motor Vehicle Programme) initiated by MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology). The primary concern of the programme was the unanticipated yet strong competitive advantages of Japanese automotive industry over that of American’s and European’s.

The key findings of the programme have been published in many books and articles. One of them is a bestseller book entitled “The Machine that Changed the World”, in which the term ‘lean’ is defined as we know it today. Lean manufacturing is a comprehensive production management system developed in Toyota originally but later gradually refined and improved by many scholars and practitioners around world.

There are two major features of lean manufacturing that distinguishes it from mass production are: first, increased efficiency through the reduction of waste and error; and second, reduced carrying cost of inventories achieved by manufacturing in small ‘batches’. The key ingredient to success of the system is Japan’s highly skilled workforce.

The overriding concept of the lean system is about doing more with less – a philosophy for identifying and removing waste across the whole business activities. It is also about adding value for the customer and for the business and it is customer driven. Lean manufacturing was not designed and implemented overnight. It took long years of relentless drive, continuous improvement, trial-and-error, and gradually perfected a system that works best.

Compared with the mass production system, lean manufacturing centres management improvement on people especially the operators on the shopfloor. Whether it is quality circle or total preventive maintenance, it is the actively participating workforce that makes them work. Lean Manufacturing focus on the add value from demand. The whole production system is basically pulled from the demand rather than entirely depend on forecasting based scheduled production.

Product customisation and increased scope of customer choices are the direct results. Lean manufacturing develop and make use of employee’s intellectual assets. Everyone is encouraged to make improvement suggestions and even have the power to stop the assembly line if they see something wrong. High commitment, hard working, well educated workforce and loyalty to the company become part of the organisational culture.

Lean manufacturing emphasises the optimisation across organisations and supply bases not just the functional silos. It promotes close partnership relations with the first tier suppliers and other strategic partners in the distribution channel. It created the tiered supply base structure. The waste between the organisations, often ignored in the past, has been identified as key improvement area. The modular design of the automobile has been master minded to fit to the tiered supply structure.

All in all, the lean system has also transformed the supply chain management which we call the ‘lean supply management’. This is precisely I am going to discuss in this chapter.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 50 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 4.2 Lean Supply Management Lean Supply Principles To understand what’s unique about lean supply and how it works, one must first examine the supply chain practice in mass production, knowing the whole lean manufacturing system was originally evolved from inherited mass production system. In the mass production supply system, the mass producer buys its basic components from a large supply base.

The supplier number will normally reach 5000 to 8000, bearing in mind that a modern automobile will have more than 20,000 basic components built into it. As shown in Figure 14 the mass supply structure is very flat. The mass producer takes on the assembly of the whole vehicle as well as many subsystems and modules. Thus the level of outsourcing is relatively low. Figure 14. Mass supply chain structure. The mass producer will design the parts to be made by the suppliers.

The process is basically a sequence of one-step-a-time from design, bid, prototype, check, contract and make. With this system, when it comes to find and select the supplier, the cost will always come first. Whosever can make the same part at a lower price will win the bid. This will often lead to a scenario that the suppliers will quote a low price to win the bid and then expecting to raise the price through the annual price adjustment.

Suppliers will hardly share any information with the buyer other than the volume and price. The consequence of the mass supply system is far from beneficial. Supplier brought into the production too late that even the suppliers have better ideas on the design; it would be too late to change. Perhaps the buyer never intended to make use of the suppliers’ know-how on the design of the vehicle anyway.

Intense cost pressure from the buyer to suppliers are detrimental that the buyer often play-off the suppliers making them reluctant to share production information. This also made it impossible for the buyer to estimate the true cost of making the parts. When the supplier has improved its production efficiency there is no incentive to merge the learning curve (to share the saving). All these resulted in high parts cost and unsatisfactory quality.

Over the years the Japanese developed a set of completely different practices – the lean supply system (Figure 15). They can be summarised in 10 lean supply principles that are in stark contrast with what the mass supply system was about. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 51 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Figure 15. Lean supply chain structure.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 52 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management 1) Supply from a smaller 1st-tier supply base: As shown in figure 15 the lean producer also use large number of suppliers, but it manages them in a tiered structure. The suppliers directly supply the buyer is called the first tier supplier.

It is this group of first tier suppliers that the lean producer now deals with directly and gets all the supply of subsystems and modules and components from. Hence the first tier suppliers group is called the supply base. The number of suppliers in the supply base for the lean structure is about 200 to 300. It is significantly lower than what mass supply system used to have. Using small supply base is a distinct supply chain configuration the all lean supply chains have in common.

This structure change has led to a raft of supply chain behaviour changes that really deliver the advantages. 2) Develop appropriate usually close partnership: by using a much smaller supply base, the lean producer can manage to spare more time and other resources to interact with each and every one of the first tier suppliers. This has made it possible for the operational relationship between the buyer and the suppliers to become close.

As will be discussed in the Chapter 7, the close and highly engaging relationships are usually defined by the contents of the exchanges in between. The close partnership will typically entail the shared vision and mission, joint design and development of new products, strategically collaborated capital investment planning, capacity synchronisation, coordination on JIT delivery and inventory optimisation. The contractual terms for the suppliers are normally from medium to long term.

The communication and engagement are at multiple levels in both formal and informal regularity. 3) Supplier selection based on performance: when the lean producer selects its suppliers, price is no longer the only criterion, nor the most important criterion like what mass producer will do.

Lean producers will base its ranking and selection on a number of higher level performance focused criteria, such as quality standard, R&D capability, delivery reliability, management system and standard, commitment and relationship. Price will also be considered as one of the criteria, but it will always be referenced to the value that the company can offer. Details of supplier selection will be discussed in Chapter 6.

Once selected as the suppliers, the lean producer will treat them as the ‘family member’ and an open and trust culture will be enforced. 4) Single or dual sourcing only: Lean producer tends to prefer the ‘single sourcing’ or ‘dual sourcing’ strategy, not ‘multiple sourcing’. Single sourcing means the lean produce will source the product (with unique SKU) from only one supplier. This means there is no back-up suppliers and no duplicated suppliers for the same product.

Compare with the multiple sourcing strategy, single sourcing has a number of key advantages. It consolidates the volume to one supplier so that the unit cost can be minimised; the supplier will reap the benefit of economy of scale. It provides the convenience and focus when research and product development is required; to deal with two different companies for the same product design could raise unnecessary complications.

It helps to develop close partnership; to contract the product to a single supplier is, in itself, a clear statement of trust and partnership initiation. However, there are also a number of risk factors involved in the single sourcing strategy. The risk of supply breakdown for whatever the causes could be an issue; lack of competition may promote complacency.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 53 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management 5) “Market price minus” rather than “Supplier cost plus”: Lean supply chain deals with the pricing issue very differently. In mass supply system, the supplied component price is normally determined by the unit cost of making the component by the supplier plus the profit margin that the supplier needs to make. That is what’s called ‘supplier cost plus (margin)’.

The problem with this approach is that the supplier’s cost model is accepted without questioning. The uncompetitive supplier cost could slip into the supply chain and compromises the supply chain competitiveness. Lean producer use the ‘market price minus’ approach.

It first determine the market price of the supplied component through market research and benchmarking; then take away (minus) the agreed reasonable profit margin that the supplier need to make on each unit; what’s left is the ‘target cost’. If the target cost is lower than supplier’s actual cost, the buyer and the supplier will then work together to lower the cost to meet the target cost. In this way, both the market price and the profit margin for the supplier are secured.

This also means that all the pricing in the supply chain are market acceptable, thus secures the product success. 6) Early and close engagement with suppliers for NPI: In mass supply system, the new product introduction is solely designed by the mass producer – the buyer; and the supplier’s job is simply to make it according to the blueprint given; the supplier has no involvement in the design stage.

Lean supply system choose to identify its suppliers first and then get them involved in the design and planning stage for the new product introduction. This way the suppliers will have plenty opportunities to contribute their expertise to the design and by working with the engineers from the buyer innovation and new ideas can be generated much more effectively. The engineers from the supplier may work in the buyer’s site as the ‘residential engineer’ as if they are the same company.

In this way, many later stage production and engineering problems can be eliminated in the earliest design stage. It is an important part of supply chain collaboration and integration. 7) Synchronised flexible capacity: In the lean supply system, the assigned capacity for both suppliers and buyers are not permanently fixed, because a fixed capacity will either be over-capacitated when the demand is low; or it will be under-capacitated when the demand is high.

More importantly the capacities of the supplier and buyers throughout the supply chain should ideally be synchronised to achieve the optimum supply chain efficiency. Lean supply system build on a largely synchronised flexible capacity. The key is to have the flexible capacity at each link of the supply chain. This capacity flexibility means having the ability to rapidly increase or decrease production levels, or to shift production capacity quickly from one products or service to another.

Such flexibility is achieved through flexible plants, processes, and workers, as well as through strategies that use the capacity of other organisations. 8) Just-in-time delivery: JIT is a well known lean approach. It represents the key philosophy and characteristic of lean manufacturing and lean supply chain. JIT is an approach to material control based on the view that a process should operate only when a customer signals a need for more parts from that process.

When a process is operated in the JIT way, goods are produced and delivered just-in-time to be sold. This principle applies to the entire lean supply chain. Parts are produced and delivered just-in-time to be built into the subassemblies. Throughout the supply network, the trigger to start work is governed by demand from the customer. A lean supply chain can be conceived as a chain of customers, with each link coordinated with its neighbours by JIT signals.

The whole supply chain is triggered by the demand from the end-consumer in the market place. This system of flowing materials and good through the supply network is characteristic of a pull system. Parts are pulled through the chain in response to demand from the end-consumer.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 54 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management 9) Incentive and reward alignment: Lean supply chain pays great attention on the alignment with the suppliers through incentive and reward. The objective of the lean producer as the buyer is not to take piece of profit from the supplier, but to work with the supply to get the cost down so that together they build a stronger supply chain.

The contributions that suppliers made to the cost reduction will be rewarded and incentivised. The typical practice is that when the supplier made x amount of saving through efficiency improvement, 50% of which will be retained by the supplier rather than become the cost cutting of the component to the buyer. Contributions on better design and quality improvement will be rewarded with more businesses.

This approach not only aligns the value adding to the reward, but also significantly boosts the suppliers’ motivation and commitment in creating a competitive supply chain. 10) Willingness to share a substantial part of its proprietary information: Lean supply chain also represents a culture of mutual trust loyalty at least and usually within the supply chain. Suppliers are willing to share substantial amount of proprietary information with the buyer.

This openness and trust not only makes the supply chain much more visible, thus easy to coordinate, but more importantly it creates synergy between the parties. The value of information increases when it is shared and made use of more widely. Brain power By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative knowhow is crucial to running a large proportion of the world’s wind turbines. Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to maintenance.

These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic lubrication. We help make it more economical to create cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, industries can boost performance beyond expectations. Therefore we need the best employees who can meet this challenge! The Power of Knowledge Engineering Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering.

Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 55 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 4.3 Lean Supply Management Focusing on Cost-to-Serve To think lean supply chain is just a cost cutting supply chain would have miss the significance of the lean by miles. It would become a ‘mean’ supply chain if that is the case.

Although, cost and efficiency appears always on the top agenda when it come to make a process leaner, but the subtle yet fundamental difference between low cost and lean supply chain can never be ignored. A slight misunderstanding of the concept could have a long lasting detrimental consequence in supply chain performance. In a lean supply chain, a cost-cutting idea can only be acceptable if it passes the ‘cost-to-serve’ test.

In other words, the focus of lean is not on the cost but on the cost-to-serve. Organisations have been applying lean concepts to corporate logistics systems and the wider domain of supply chain management ever since Toyota demonstrated its undisputable leadership position in production management. However, as so often occurs when new concepts are applied to supply chain thinking, people can start to have unreasonable expectations about the actual benefits.

The cause of such unreasonable expectation appears always stemmed from the misconception of the original terms and ideas. The fundamental concept of lean is identifying and eliminating waste in the material, processes, time and information, and adding value perceived from the eyes of consumer. Thus waste is the one to be cut across the management spectrum, not necessarily the cost. When a cost is identified as the waste, which does not seem to have added any value, it should be rightly slashed.

The key issue here, therefore, is to looking for the cost that adds no value. If the cost that does add value to the supply chain has been cut, value has been cut with it. There is little justification why should value adding cost is to be cut. Toyota’s three original criteria for value adding activities are: 1) There must be physical changes 2) It must be concerned by the customer 3) It must be right first time Wasteful activities are therefore defined as non-value adding activities.

This is where the concept of ‘serve’ kicks in. If the activity adds the value and the value is perceived by the customer, the activity ‘serves’ the customer. Therefore an appropriate translation of the lean principles in terms of attitude towards the cost should be that to identify and eliminating the non-value adding or non- ‘serving’ activities. Thus, a measure for how wasteful is a cost or a cost incurring activity can be defined by what’s known as ‘cost-to-serve’.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 56 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management With this measure, one can compare activities to see which one adds more value and which one is more of a waste. When the ‘total cost involved’ remains unchanged, the more ‘Customer perceived value and service’ received the lower the ‘costto-serve’, and vice versa. So, the lean approach is not cost cutting but cost-to-serve cutting, which clarifies the opening confusion in this section.

Furthermore, the purpose of lean approach can, therefore, be interpreted as to minimise the level of cost-to-serve. This lean concept based on cost-to-serve can explain why some supply chains achieve low cost by ensuring customers are not over-serviced, while others achieved much leaner supply chain by investing more into the operation. 4.4 Drivers for Lean Supply Chain What makes a supply chain lean? Research and literatures have pointed to six key drivers that will lead to a lean supply chain.

Driver 1: Waste Reduction Elimination of waste is one of the key tenets of lean manufacturing. In the broadest sense, waste can be found from all aspect of business activities. It can take the form of time, inventory, redundant process and defects. Supply chain members must work together to identify and eliminate all those possible wasteful and non-value adding elements in order to become lean.

This elimination of waste will have a direct and visible consequence, which is the reduction of cost to the supply chain. When the cost reduced, assuming the output of the supply chain remains the same, the supply chain efficiency improves and cost-to-serve reduces. It is crucial that waste must be assessed from supply chain perspective not from a company’s own individual perspective.

For example, a company may move the inventory responsibility to the supplier in order to reduce its own the inventory holding cost. This may seem to be a ‘waste’ or cost reduction activity. However, from a supply chain perspective, the inventory holding cost has not be eliminated but merely been moved from one section of the supply chain to another. The emphasis, as discussed in the previous section, must be on the waste but not the cost.

Cost cutting, if it becomes the driver, can be very misleading and confusion. A preoccupation of cost cutting often leads to conflict of interest between the parties of the supply chain; and increase the supply chain total costs whilst trying to reduce the cost in an isolated local section. More importantly, the most sinister waste often lies in between the suppliers and buyers and not covered in anybody’s boundaries.

The waste of supply chain resources by not getting the suppliers involved in the early stages of product development is often not identifiable by either side. It is therefore highly recommended that supply chain should have joint, if not integrated, approach toward waste reduction. Collaborative policies and jointly formed multifunctional teams are much more effective in identifying the waste lurking in the gaps of the supply chain.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 57 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Driver 2: Demand Management Managing demand is by far one of most important frontier that supply chains compete in the market place, and there is always significant room for improvement. In fact, the performance of the supply chain viewed by the end-consumer is largely hinged on how the consumer demand is managed, fulfilled and satisfied.

The status quo of the demand management in supply chains today show it is not just a matter of a good will or customer minded attitude. It is now a measure of supply chain capability which is often facilitated by sophisticated POS (point of sale) data communication system. Demand management thus will be enhanced or constrained by the companies’ material resource management systems which may or may not be compatible throughout the supply chain.

How well firms manage the demand and demand related information such as forecasting and market signals is also reflected in how they view and manage their collaboration with buyers and suppliers. Real-time collaboration and responses are highly desirable but hardly evident in most of supply chains.

Collaboration, not just for demand management, must begin with management’s understanding and acceptance of the concept, followed by a communicated commitment throughout the managers as well as the workforce. Regular meetings and reviews between the partners should be hardwired into the processes. Documentation, such as supplier’s manual, could be a great building block. Challenge the way we run EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF FULL ENGAGEMENT… RUN FASTER.

RUN LONGER.. RUN EASIER… READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY WWW.GAITEYE.COM 1349906_A6_4+0.indd 1 bookboon.com Download free eBooks at 22-08-2014 12:56:57 58 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Driver 3: Process Standardization Process standardization enables the continuous flow to run through the company and the supply chain, which represents another tenet of lean supply chain.

Flow means the uninterrupted movement of a product or service through the system to the customer. Major inhibitors of flow are work in queue, batch processing, and transportation. These roadblocks slow the time from product or service initiation to delivery, and increase the material and work in process carrying cost. The process flow concept helps to see and understand the value stream of the production and the supply chain.

It also represents a shift from the vertical organisational structure and functional silos to a horizontal connectivity of processes in a stream of value. This value stream process linked the business activities to the need of customers. This means managing the supply chain process flow means focusing on system efficiency rather than activity efficiency. Flow is best enabled when material and processes are standardized across the supply chain to reduce the complexity.

But the standardized processes can only be achieved through wide range of close collaborations between the members of the supply chain. The typical processes to be standardized are planning and production. It helps the supply chain up and downstream to have thorough understanding of the process involved. Products and material standardization can help to share the subcomponents across the product lines, which will lead to volume advantages, consistency and operational cost savings.

Driver 4: Engaging People Lean manufacturing differs significantly from production systems in its people engagement. To implement lean process and develop a lean supply chain, managers must start with engaging people. This means the lean campaign is not just a brilliant idea of the CEO, nor it is the job of executive board, it is task that everyone in the organisation must get involved, especially the operators and engineers in the operational frontier on the shopfloor.

The improvement ideas and innovative changes are often come directly from the people who do the job. This also means that ownership of the lean campaign is in the hand of every employee not just a small group of senior managers. Engaging people is a near miracle drive for the lean transformation. • First, by engaging everyone in the company, you have dug into the goldmine of intellectual assets of people. Their knowledge and expertise have been mobilised to contribute to the value adding activities.

• Second, engaging people is the best way to motivate them. People are the only active force in the business. How powerful this force is depends almost entirely how well they are motivated for the common courses of the supply chain. • Third, engaging people is the only practical way to change the organisational culture; culture is can only be carried and displayed by people. A lean supply chain can be built to last if and only if it is created with the embedded culture.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 59 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Driver 5: Collaboration Lean philosophy promotes working together and collaboration. Lean supply chain thrives on collaboration. Collaboration can take place between organisations within the supply chain or across different supply chains.

Collaboration often results in shred resources leading to high level of economy of scope; it also significantly reduces the business risks for the partners by sharing it and jointly averting it; it promotes technological advancement and innovative product and service development. The power of collaboration has undoubtedly been recognised in all lean enterprises. How to initiate collaboration from the lean supply chain context?

It must start with the top level strategic intention from both or all sides. This intention is obviously based on the stakeholder’s interest and the potential benefits that the collaboration may generate. Initial proposal and executive level contact to draw a broad plan and review all the involved factors; then further collaborative areas or projects can then be put into details; finally the implementation and trial programme can be launched.

However this is what normally called the top-down approach. Many collaboration is created from bottom-up approaches. In this approach, practice and experience in working together in the past will have laid a good foundation; managers then build on that to expand the scope of activity and formalise the collaboration through institutionalising the processes. Driver 6: Continuous improvement Lean philosophy believes the journey to improve will never end. If better is possible good is not enough.

It does not need to be a quantum leap; any small steps of changes toward better operations will be encouraged. Toyota Production System itself was not designed and created by somebody overnight, but rather an ultimate result from long years of gradually, step by step changes through the continuous improvement processes. A continuous improvement process is an ongoing effort to improve products, services or processes.

These efforts seek the ‘incremental’ improvement at a time and over time; it also embrace the ‘breakthrough’ improvement as and when it occurs. Some successful implementations of the continuous improvement have been known as ‘Kaizen’, which is basically the Japanese word for continuous improvement.

The key features of Kaizen are: 4.5 • Improvements are based on many, small changes rather than one radical changes • Ideas of changes are often come from the workers at the operational front • Small improvements do not usually require any capital investment or major change of process • All employees are engaged to participate to seek the ways to improve their own performance • It encourages the workers to take the ownership of their performance Lean Process Mapping Tools Lean approach, unlike many other ‘flavour of the month’, has been extremely enduring.

After three decades of worldwide preaching and application, lean movement is still going strong. In today’s business management world, lean method is still the most popular one across the world. Over more than 70% of organisations have, to various extents, exercised lean. One of the reasons why lean is so widely applied and continues to be the most favourable method is that it has a set of practical tools that can be readily applied in almost all business circumstances.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 60 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management The tools created originally by the Toyota production systems are called ‘lean process mapping tools’. The purposes of those tools are to visualise the material flows in the production lines and in the supply chains; to see where the waste is.

They help to pull together the lean thinking principles and facilitate the discussion and communication, and help to identify the bottleneck and prioritise the remedial actions. There are quite many widely used tools that can directly support lean supply chain management. Most of the figures of the tools are sourced from the article ‘Going lean’ by Peter Hines and David Taylor (2000).

• Value Stream Mapping • Time Based Process Mapping • Process activities mapping • Supply chain response matrix • Logistics pipeline map • Production variety funnel • Quality filter mapping • Demand amplification mapping • Value adding time profile Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 61 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management The value stream mapping tool as shown in figure 16 is designed to map out the value adding and wastage from the supplier to customer, including logistics, purchasing, order fulfilment, production processes.

Figure 16. Value stream mapping tool (source: syque.com) Time-based process mapping tool is a simply ‘walk through’ tool to identify and map out the activity time (suppose to be value adding) and waste time (non-value adding) in every steps that the material has gone through, as shown in Figure 17. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 62 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management NY028099B TMP PRODUCTION 1 6x4 2014 JEGREENE Figure 17.

Time-based process mapping jcs ACCCTR00 bookboon The process activity mapping tool maps out the four different activities: operation, transport, inspection and storage that the materials have to go through. Keys are assigned to each activity types to help visualisation. Plan flow diagram can also be added to optimise the flow. ©2014 Accenture. All rights rserved. Bring your talent and passion to a global organization at the forefront of business, technology and innovation.

Discover how great you can be. Visit accenture.com/bookboon Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 63 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Figure 18. Process activity mapping Supply chain response matrix is used to evaluate the inventory and lead times incurred by a supply chain in maintaining a given level of customer service. It is used to identify large sects of time and inventory and allows managers to assess the need to hold the inventory.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 64 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Figure 19. Supply chain response matrix. Logistics pipeline map is a compliment to the supply chain response matrix. It shows the accumulation of process time on the horizontal axis and of inventory levels on the vertical axis. It shows exactly where the inventory and time accumulate within each operation (see figure 20).

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 65 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Figure 20. logistics pipeline map Production variety funnel is a visual mapping technique that plots the number of product variety at each stage of the manufacturing process. This technique is used to identify the point at which a generic product becomes either increasingly or totally customer specific.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 66 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Figure 21. Product variety funnel.

 678'<)25<2850$67(5©6'(*5(( &KDOPHUV8QLYHUVLW\RI7HFKQRORJ\FRQGXFWVUHVHDUFKDQGHGXFDWLRQLQHQJLQHHU LQJDQGQDWXUDOVFLHQFHVDUFKLWHFWXUHWHFKQRORJ\UHODWHGPDWKHPDWLFDOVFLHQFHV DQGQDXWLFDOVFLHQFHV%HKLQGDOOWKDW&KDOPHUVDFFRPSOLVKHVWKHDLPSHUVLVWV IRUFRQWULEXWLQJWRDVXVWDLQDEOHIXWXUH¤ERWKQDWLRQDOO\DQGJOREDOO\ 9LVLWXVRQ&KDOPHUVVHRU1H[W6WRS&KDOPHUVRQIDFHERRN Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 67 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Quality filter mapping is a tool designed to identify quality problems in the order fulfilment process or the wider supply chain.

The map shows where three different types of quality defects occur in the value stream. Figure 22. Quality filter mapping. Demand amplification mapping is a graph of quantity against time, showing the batch sizes of a product at various stages of the production process. This may be plotted with a company or along the supply chain. It also can be used to show inventory holdings at various stages long the supply chain.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 68 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Lean Supply Management Figure 23. Demand amplification mapping. Value adding time profile plots the accumulation of both value adding and non value adding costs against the time. It is an excellent tool for looking at time compression or mapping out where money is being wasted. Figure 24. Value adding time profile.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 69 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management 5 Agile Supply Management 5.1 The Need for Agility Having understood the impact and the undisputable success of the lean philosophy applied in many organisations world over. Can we come to a conclusion that the next milestone, after the craft production and mass production, is going to be the lean production?

To answer this question, one needs to first establish whether the lean approach can fit to all business environments now and in the future. Researches and literatures so far appear to believe the otherwise.

The critical argument here is that the lean system was developed from a forecasting based volume production industrial sector where the market differentiator is reliability and cost, and today large part of our global market is variety dominated and the differentiator is speed and responsiveness. Hence, lean probably is not a cure-all approach after all.

The new breed of enterprises such as Zara, Dell, Cisco and Li & Fung are certainly demonstrating apparently different success models when it come to responding to customers in a fast-moving environment, where life cycles are short and variety reigns. The winners in this environment are those that can respond quickly and efficiently. This renewed competitive arena calls for more nimble businesses and more agile supply chains. I’M WITH ZF. SOFTWARE DEVELOPER AND RACING CHAMPION.

www.im-with-zf.com LIBOR JELÍNEK Soft ware Develop er ZF Friedrichshafen Scan the code and find out more about me and what I do at ZF: AG Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 70 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Apparently, the focus in an agile supply chain is on being fast and also on being smart in how you aligning with the increasingly demanding customers.

But the tenet is still that supply chains are driven by the end-consumers in the dynamic market places. The need for supply chain agility ultimately comes from the consumer. However, the customer behaviours could be driven by uncertainties caused possibly by the world oil prices, terrorism-related demand change or by the impact new technological advancement.

The unpredictability is not so much the result of one customer ad hoc behaviour; it is combined effect of an uncertain world rippling up and down the supply chain. Often the longer the supply chain the more complexity and increased risk of bullwhip effect. In industries such as fashion and consumer technology, the plethora of products seem to increase exponentially while in the same time the product life cycles in the market are getting shorter.

It will come as no surprise that the dominant buying behaviour of customers in an agile supply chain operated environment is that of demanding quick response. The known business models of make-to-order or assemble-to-order are critical for catering such demand. Hewlett-Packard has long adopted the practice of postponing the final assembly of its printers until the exact market demand in terms of product configurations are known.

Thus what it produced are almost guaranteed to be sold and not over production or redundant finished goods inventories are created. Similarly, Dell Computer is a master at assemble to order, and often the assembly were carried out during the distribution and delivery process, so that the customer can have their bespoke computer delivered in just a few days.

And for Dell, the generic components in the up part of the supply chain were produced by the make-to-forecast model where efficiency and low cost can be achieved; the assemble-to-order at the final sector of the supply chain delivers the speed and responsiveness. 5.2 Agile Supply Chain Concept Agility is a supply chain-wide capability that embraces organisational structures, value chain configurations, information systems, logistics processes and in particular mindset and culture.

A key characteristic of an agile supply chain is flexibility, which should be interpreted from two side of supply chain. From the inside of supply chain, such flexibility means configurations and structures are not fixed. They may transform quickly as the needs arises. From outside, i.e.

from market and consumer perspective, the supply chain must deliver timely products and services; and deliver them at the beginning of the usually short profit widows; often to be innovative and to be the market leader. Thus ‘agile supply chain’ is essentially a practical approach to managing supply networks and developing flexible capabilities to satisfy the fast changing customer demand.

It is about moving and transforming a supply chain that is structured around the focal company and its product categories to the one that is centred on end-consumers and their requirement. As the Chairman of Li and Fung Group – the largest export trader in Hong Kong, says that one of the key features of his approach is to organise for customer, not on country units that may end up competing against each other.

The capabilities of an agile supply chain is created and measured from the ‘outside in’ as opposed to pushing product offerings into the market – the ‘inside out’. The strategic focus of an agile supply chain is a relentless pursuit of customer value in every part of its fabric. The operational planning of agile supply chain is focused on the capabilities for responsiveness and constantly in anticipation of unpredictable sudden changes in demand.

Such capability building and customer attention cannot be achieved without a cost. Typically, in order to ensure availability, extra production and service capacity need to be reserved; this will incur additional cost of over capacity. However, when the strategic positioning of the supply chain is rightly set, the gains from the agility are worth the effort and cost. This actually raised an important question. In which business circumstances that the agile supply chain is worthwhile?

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 71 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management To answer this question, we may do some comparative observations between lean and agile by looking at some most common variables in supply chain management. First, we can make observation on the volume and variety of the product that supply chain produces.

As shown in Figure 25, lean works best for high volume, low variety and more predictable operating environment; whilst agility is needed in less predictable environment where the demand for variety and choice is a dominant feature. Figure 25, Volume and variety observation. We can also make observation from some specific characteristics of demand and supply.

As shown in Figure 26 the supply characteristics in lead-time can be long or short; whilst the predictability of market demand can be categorised into either predictable or unpredictable. It then become intuitive that in the case of long supply lead-time with predictable customer demand, the plan and execution style of lean model works the best; while in the case of short supply lead-time with unpredictable demand, the Agile responsiveness works the best.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 72 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Figure 26. Demand characteristics observation More comprehensively, Mason-Jones et al. (1999) developed a comparative analysis between lean and agile by observing a whole host of supply chain attributes as shown in Table 1. This list clearly mapped out two distinctively different attributive profiles for both lean and agile supply chain to home in. Table 1.

Comparison of lean supply with agile supply Distinguishing Attributes Lean Supply Agile Supply Typical products Commodities Fashion goods Market place demand Predictable Volatile Product variety Low High Product life cycle Long Short Customer drivers Cost Availability Profit margin Low High Dominant cost Physical cost Marketability cost Stock-out penalties Long-term contractual Immediate and volatile Purchasing policy Buy materials Assign capacity Information enrichment Highly desirable Obligatory Forecasting mechanism Algorithmic consultative Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 73 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 5.3 Agile Supply Management Agile Supply Chain Framework The comparison of lean and agile, have certainly helped to make some intuitive sense about the concept of the agile supply chain.

But it would be more useful if some theoretical underpinning of the agile supply chain model can be provided. Professor Alan Harrison of Cranfield University proposed a framework (Harrison, 1999) for agile supply chain, which was perhaps the earliest theoretical attempt to the framework. The four key components of the framework can be interpreted as follows. Figure 27.

Agile supply chain framework (adopted from Harrison 2005) Agile supply chain is about virtual integration Agility implies that the supply chain is able to respond to the changes in the local market requirements and much of these can perhaps be the opportunities. To do this, agile supply chain must be able to leverage skills, assets and other resources across the divisional units in the local region in which they operate.

This means they need to establish the shared goals and communicate them across the supply chain and work toward them jointly in harmony. The bound between organisations created by the shared goals does not necessarily vertical where the ownership consolidates. In fact, typically, it creates the virtual integration – the vertical integration without being so.

Virtual integration is characterised by informal and flexible and dynamic relationships between the divisional units and different sectors of the supply chain. The governance of such integration explicitly does not get involved with initiatives that are specific to an individual business. It does not centrally control the supply chain operations, but rather it supports and facilitates larger or overall supply chain initiatives from which many parts of the supply chain can and should benefit.

The virtual integration also provides senior management with a method for supporting and steering direction on most important direction. As the structure and processes have been kept minimum in the virtual integration, and individual unit involvement remains fully empowered, the supply chain becomes more agile and responsive.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 74 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Agile supply chain relies on market sensitivity Market sensitivity means that the supply chain’s internal measures, whatever it may be, are sourced directly from and linked closely with the external market that the supply chain is operated in.

All too often, we see performance measures and business assessment are based on the data, information from with the internal operation and mostly generated within the supply chain. This will most probably misguide the management and drive the supply chain away from its ultimate objective of serving the market. What a truly agile supply chain do in terms of performance measure and operational improvement is to set up a very high level of market sensitivity.

Such market sensitivity has two implications. First is to the internal performance measure. Every measure must be immediately or ultimately linked to the consumers in the market place. This means linking internal customers and external customers all to the ultimate end-consumers. To do this, a causal map from what really customer care about to every operation the business delivers must be meticulously drawn out. Second, is to quick responsiveness.

How quick can a supply chain respond to the market change is a primary measure for the agility of the supply chain. Its attainment is largely dependent on how closely the supply chain is able to sense the sudden changes of the market behaviour. Zara is able to have the market sensitivity because they created process of online market feedback from their stores through PDF units. Dell is able to have their market sensitivity by creating a web-based distribution and service channel.

Linköping University – innovative, highly ranked, European Interested in Computer Science? Kick-start your career with an English-taught master’s degree. Click here!

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 75 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Agile supply chain needs improved process integration Agile supply chain will require higher level of integration between internal operational processes, such as sales, forecasting, production planning, sourcing, and delivery. The logic behind is straight forward.

When sales operation sensed any change of market trends it will trigger a chain reaction of responsive or corrective changes through many other operations in the supply chain. How fast the supply chain can react to the market change is dependent on the speed of changes in many other internal processes. Thus, it makes sense that the internal processes must be integrated and perform as if they a one entity. There are number of things that the supply chain managers can do to make difference.

First, forecast by market not by business units. The forecast generated by business units often show huge variance and inconsistency. What an agile supply chain can do is to create a so-called market lead team which will be responsible to all the forecasting required by the supply chain and the business units wherein. Second, set out to create a capability of coordinating the three prime sectors source-make-deliver. It is all too easy to assume the ERM system will look after everything.

The matter of fact is that they don’t. Third, managers must link forecasting to improvement goals. This is so because the forecasting is a process that can take the market sentiment and give indications as which directions the market is moving to. Business improvement will only make sense when it responses to the changing directions of the market.

Agile supply chain is often dynamic network based Looking at the agile supply chain’s architecture, managers need to clarify how the participating members of the agile supply chains are best connected with each other. As discussed in Chapter 3 the supply chain configuration can be divided broadly into two types of networks: stable network and dynamic network. The stable network is a normal form of supply chain configuration where the suppliers and buyers are formed in tiers along the supply chain.

The suppliers’ involvement in the supply chain is more or less fixed. The operational guidelines are formalised with the OEM. The technical role and competence positioning in the supply chain is also predefined. The style of operation of this type of network is mainly mechanical in nature that is displayed in its physical functions. However, the dynamic network is preferred by the agile supply chain and it has a set of very different characterises.

In the dynamic network, the ties between suppliers and buyers, and amongst the suppliers themselves, are much looser than that of stable network. Short term contract or virtual relations are more often the case. Some even strategically important functions such as product design and marketing can be undertaken by independent organisations at a short term basis. Market forces rather than formalised structure are the means by which the parties are bonded together.

The network relies on more sophisticated information systems with high level of information disclosure between the parties, whereby instant switch of connection can be easily established if required by the sudden change of market. For those reasons, the dynamic network is undoubtedly a more superior form of networking for agile operations.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 76 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 5.4 Agile Supply Management Competing on Responsiveness Ultimately, the validity of the agile model is to be tested, not by a formula, but by the competition in the market place. The market place to test agile supply chain is presumed to be volatile and fast changing in nature. The top measure for the fitness of a supply chain is responsiveness. Typically high responsiveness cannot be achieved for minimal cost.

Customers and suppliers have to make a choice. The trade-off can be tough at times. For any agile supply chain there is always an incremental cost associated with servicing the changing demand. For those genuinely need urgent service will pay a premium. If the customer’s demand is not urgent, they perhaps can wait or chose alternative cheaper version which is often offered by lean supply chains.

The unique value proposition of agile supply chains is that they can respond rapidly and with high priority in unpredictable supply and demand conditions. To do this sometimes means holding spare or redundant capacity to cope with the sudden surges in the pipeline. That is part of the cost the agile supply chain has to pay. Zara has two very large distribution centres at La Coruna and Zaragoza in Spain which sometimes may only be 50% utilised.

This is not an oversight on the capacity management, but a deliberated strategy. Zara management know the cost of redundancy, but they also know the benefit and indeed the necessity of having transient capacity available to support their rapid fire replenishment business model. The levels of responsiveness a supply chain can deliver do make significant difference in terms of winning the market share.

In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, which swept through the US state of Louisiana in September 2005, one of the most affected companies was a major oil company, which lost all of its computing equipment in its service centres. The company contacted Hewlett Packard, its regular hardware supplier, with a priority request to replace 1,000 specially configured PCs as quickly as possible. HP got back a few days later with a commitment to deliver the replacements by Christmas.

This was not the answer that the company wanted to hear, so it called Dell which had not previously been a preferred supplier and asked the same question. Back came the answer almost immediately: “Is Monday Okey?” Dell got the business won a new major customer. It is quite telling that the supply chain that can respond quickly wins. How to create the structured supply chain responsiveness? The most commonly used strategy is called postponement, or delayed configuration.

Postponement is not just an operational trick, it requires the supply chain to configure in a particular way which may or may not be so obvious at the first sight. To illustrate the concept of postponement, we must first understand the concept of ‘order decoupling point’ in supply chain.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 77 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management As shown in figure 28 the order decoupling point determines how far the customer orders will enter into the supply chain. It is the point (marked by the inverted triangle in the figure) beyond which the customer specific order is no longer visible to the supply chain. Different supply chains have different design for where the order decoupling point sits.

For a supply chain that is mainly ship-to-stock, the decoupling point tends to be very much at the downstream end of the supply chain; while for the supply chain that is mainly make-to-order, the decoupling point is usually at the manufacturing stage in the middle part of supply chain. It is therefore clear that on the downstream side of the decoupling point the supply chain operating model is customer ‘pull’ – responding to demand changes.

On the upstream side of the decoupling point the supply chain is operating in a ‘push’ mode, where one the generic components are produced based on amalgamated forecast and schedule. Figure 28. Supply chain order de-coupling point The postponement strategy is aiming to achieve market responsiveness in terms of producing the right variety and right product portfolio at the right quantity, but do it efficiently at a mass production price.

To achieve this, the order decoupling point is postponed to a later, or as later as possible, stage close to product delivery. The resultant supply chain will have most part its operation under scheduled generic components manufacturing, which is based on the aggregated demand and in a volume production mode leading to low cost and high efficiency. Reflecting what we have leant about the lean supply, understandably this part of supply chain (before the decoupling point) is predominantly lean.

Then at the end of this lean section, there will be a stockpile of the inventory of those generic components called strategic inventory. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 78 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Figure 29.

Postponement strategy (source: Christopher, 2005) After the strategic inventory, the orders from customers are visible to the supply chain, and the supply chain operation is focused on configuring (assembling to order) the products to satisfy the demand. Because it is driven by the demand, this part of the supply chain is primarily agile.

I joined MITAS because I wanted real responsibili� I joined MITAS because I wanted real responsibili� Real work International Internationa al opportunities �ree wo work or placements �e Graduate Programme for Engineers and Geoscientists Maersk.com/Mitas www.discovermitas.com M Month 16 I was a construction M supervisor ina cons I was the North Sea supe advising and the N he helping foremen advis ssolve problems Real work he helping International Internationa al opportunities �ree wo work or placements ssolve p Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 79 � for Engin Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management The critical design point of postponement strategy is based on the understanding of the market.

When operated in an uncertain and volatile market environment the actual customer demand on the variety of products is largely uncertain, unpredictable or volatile. The supply chain could make all the possible variety of products in sufficient volume to stock in order to satisfy the unknown demand, but the redundant products cost will be too high and supply chain marketability would be too poor.

Instead, the supply chain could reconfigure the material flows and make a more predicable volume of generic components ready at the strategic inventory point, but postpone the product configurations to the very last stage when the demand is a lot clearer and the specific volumes of each variety become more predictable.

In this way, not only the specific customer demand can be fulfilled very quickly because all the generic components are ready and only need to be assembled to the required configurations, also there will be no redundant finished products because the volume is produced in such a short span before delivery that it is matched to the exact demand. 5.5 Getting It Right from Within. To develop the agile capability for your supply chain, you must start from within.

There number of things the organisations in the supply chain need to get it right before they can become competitive in the agility dominated operating environment. This may include organisational structure change, process reengineering, cultivating appropriate culture, developing KPI, and investing in IT system. The top level executives commitment and direct involvement is the transformation is critical. It may also down to the right style of leadership.

Structure Change As mentioned earlier, agile supply chain differs from the lean one from its structure to say the least. The structure change required for developing an agile supply chain applies to two aspects. One is the supply chain architecture; another is the organisational internal structure. It has to be said here that we assume business and supply chain strategies have been and will be developed appropriately to support the structure decision making.

For the supply chain structure, it all about the organisations external connections and how the whole supply chain is networked together. The first consideration is the extent of vertical integration. For an agile supply chain, the broad guidance is to have small or narrow span of vertical integration. This will give the supply chain a great deal of flexibility without feeling bogged down by the fixed assets. The second aspect to consider might be the outsourcing alternatives.

To have a network of capable suppliers that can take outsourcing contracts from you, will materially improve the agility of the supply chain. The other one to consider is the location of the suppliers. Long distance and poor infrastructure will certain impede the supply chain’s fast reaction and thus need to be pruned in the network. From the organisational internal structure point of view, agile supply chain also demands some structure changes.

Some historically centralised operation may need to be decentralised to cut the bureaucracy and respond to local conditions. Multi-divisional structure may be advisable to concentrate on the product, service, and geographical area and allowing units to adapt to local needs. Agile operations would also prefer more flat structures not tall hierarchies. High degree of empowerment and less formal rules are also positive factors to the agile structure.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 80 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Process Change In the agile supply chain, processes are still necessary, but they are fewer by definition. Any process slows down the response time should be considered for reengineering. It is likely that some process short-cuts are necessary for the agile operation and the level of operational risks may rise.

But the top priority is still the responsiveness, so long as the safety is not compromised. Ways may be found to by-pass the regulations and opportunistic flair could play a role in achieving unanticipated profit. However, this does not mean to create any expansive purchasing or costly deliveries.

Quite the contrary, the process that drive and support agile supply chain are often the unique combinations of standard or modular process which is the key to containing the cost while delivering the service to unexpected demand. The postponement process discussed in the previous section is a widely applied process to achieve higher agility. It is also important that the business processes are aligned through the supply chain. Thus a coordinated process development for agile response is essential.

IT Systems Agile supply chains are best underpinned by an ERP system similar to those used in other supply chain types. An array of additional applications designed to optimise the agile capabilities including process alignment and joint forecasting and planning. Zara’s achievement of remarkable responsiveness was due no small measure of its IT systems. The centralised design teams for man’s ware, woman’s ware and children’s ware are hardwired with the retail stores around the world.

Using on-line market information the teams will be able to change or creating new designs quickly ahead of the competition. Anecdotally, if as few as three people have come to the store and asked something that Zara don’t have. Zara’s design team will take it on and design it for them. Nevertheless, investing in applications does not necessarily mean investing in large lump of capital equipment. In fact, investing in hardware may even hinder the agility development.

Hardware is generally rigid and non-transferable between markets, once invested it will only depreciate, and it depreciates much faster when new updated equipment are coming onto the market. Renting or buying the service without taking the ownership of the hardware appears to be a better choice for agile supply chains.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 81 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Agile Supply Management Key Performance Indicators Agile supply chain will also need a set of its own unique key performance indicators (KPI). The commonly used KPI in predominantly lean supply chain operating environment will not fit and often misguide the management.

On top of the most frequently used KPI for agile supply chains are: • Design to market time • Customer satisfaction and delight • Production throughput • Delivery lead-time • Product availability in the market • Capacity synchronisation and optimisation • Cost-to-serve • Frequency of product up-grading • Service innovation and flexibility Fundamentally the KPI for agile supply chain is the market responsiveness in terms of speed product range and service quality.

But the detailed KPI for a specific organisation, however, must be aligned with its top level business strategies Implementation Web-enabled Applications Are you ready to do what matters when it comes to Technology?

Data Analytics Big Data IT Consultancy Technology SAP Information Management Social Business Cyber Crime Innovation Technology Advisory Java Enterprise Application CRM Enterprise Content Management SQL End-to-End Solution Cloud Computing and related with the industry sector and product categories.

.NET Implementation Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 82 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection 6 Purchasing and Supplier Selection 6.1 Strategic Role of Purchasing Purchasing function has a strategically indispensible role to play in supply chain management. It covers the sourcing end of supply chain management interfacing with the delivery end of the suppliers.

• The classical definition of purchasing is: to obtain materials and/or services of the right quality in the right quantity from the right source, deliver them to the right place at the right price.

• The composite definition of purchasing is: the process undertaken by the organisational unit which, either as a function or as part of an integrated supply chain, is responsible for procuring supplies of materials and services of the right quality, quantity, time and price, and the management of the suppliers, thereby contributing to the competitive advantages of the achievement of the corporate strategy.

Purchasing management thus, by definition, supports and implements the supply chain management strategies. It is one of, or maybe the most important, delivery arms of supply chain management. Often it directly delivers the cost saving, quality improvement and fulfils the supplier relationships.

Purchasing function’s critical role can also be illustrated from a simplified income statement: Total sales = £10,000,000 Purchased Service / materials = £7,000,000 Salaries = £2,000,000 Overheads = £500,000 Profit = £500,000 Suppose this is a company’s profit-loss account for the current year, and the shareholders demand the CEO to deliver double the profit in the next year. What can the CEO do with regards to those factors associated with the account?

Well, assume everything else remains equal, doubling the total sales will eventually double the profit. It is equivalent to create two companies. But the problem with this approach is that the sales volume is often constrained by the market. If the product cycle has passed the maturity and started to decline, to maintain the amount of sale would be difficult let alone to double it. Or, the company could reduce the salary by 25%, which could make £500,000 saving for the bottom line.

Common sense tells that it is not feasible, and the CEO would not agree as his 25% cut would be biggest of all. Another alternative is to get rid of all the overheads costs, which also makes £500,000 saving. However, this is almost impossible to do practically, nor agreeable theoretically.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 83 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection What’s left is to curtail the buyer-in goods and service by 7% which will make $500,000 savings for the bottom line. Now, just 7% cut in purchasing would result in 100% increase of profit. This is no doubt a very effective approach as the effort appears to be small and the gain is amazingly high. It is apparently the only viable and convincing choice there is to it.

Who is going to do that for the company? It is the purchasing function. This is why purchasing function is distinctly so important to the company’s profit level. It is the company’s profit leveraging point, whereby a small input can generate large output. No wonder we see many OEMs often try to enforce the supplied material cost reduction by 4-5% year on year, albeit, this may not be the best approach from the contemporary supply chain best-practice perspective.

The operational processes of purchasing function can be represented by the diagram shown in Figure x. It basically intermediates the company’s internal operations with the suppliers, ensuring the right suppliers are found and engaged in a process of supply and delivering the required materials, components and services that best suit the internal operations. Figure 30. Operational purchasing activities (adopted from Slack, 1998) These are just the visible parts of purchasing function.

Beyond these processes, there might more important high level strategic decisions to be made for the purchasing, through the purchasing and by the purchasing.

Typically, make-or-buy decisions, supply base rationalisation, supplier development and etc.. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 84 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 6.2 Purchasing and Supplier Selection Purchasing Portfolio “What is the best way to managing purchasing?” “What is the best strategy for purchasing and supply?” Many practitioners and academics have asking these questions in past and still today.

In fact, there were no shortages of answers to these questions in the plethora of literatures even in the early years. But few stood the test of time for its applicability and universality. Then there came Dr.Peter Kraljic from McKinsey who claimed that there is no single best way existed for managing purchasing in all circumstances.

He then published a paper entitled “Purchasing Must Become Supply Management” in Harvard Business Review in September 1983, and proposed the very well known Kraljic Purchasing Portfolio model (see figure x). This model had since then been widely cited and referenced across the world in all types of management literatures. There are now many modified versions by many scholars which have contributed and further developed the application of this model.

If it really matters, make it happen – with a career at Siemens. siemens.com/careers Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 85 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection Figure 31.

Kraljic purchasing portfolio matrix Dr. Kraljic’s answer to the question can be paraphrased as that although there is no single best way, but if we know which product category we are purchasing, there would be a best way to do the purchasing for this product category. He looked in two dimensions to categorise all the purchased products. One is the supply risk of the product from the market; two is the financial impact of the purchased material.

Thus a four categories matrix emerged presenting four different types of purchased product. Leverage products Leverage products are those you buy from your supplier that will have significant impact on the finance of your own final product, but it is relatively easy to buy from the supply market, hence low market risk. For example, wood is a leveraged product for a wood furniture manufacture to purchase. This is because that most of the furniture they do are made of wood.

A large portion of the cost come from wood price and the furniture prices are dependent on the wood cost in the market place. However, unless it is rare wood which they hardly use, the supply of wood is plentiful and there is very low risk of short supply. For such leverage products, Kraljic proposes a purchasing strategy of competitive bidding. Understandably, competitive bidding will only work if there is more than one supplier.

The low supply risk factor of leverage products supports this strategy. Alternative suppliers are in this case available and substitution of supplier is possible. The buyer can then benefit on the lower price and cost advantages. It is important to understand that the buyer need to do so, because the high financial impact the leveraged products.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 86 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection Routine Products Routine products are those materials that have very little financial impact on the buyer’s own products and also there are plenty to choose from in the market place. Examples of these products or materials are small fixtures, pant, and standard components like springs and nuts. They don’t cost much in comparison to the total cost of your own products.

The market availability for those materials is very high and there is no risk of supply. For the routine products, Kraljic proposed a purchasing strategy of system contracting plus e-commerce solutions, because these products have large varieties and high logistics complexity and often labour intensive in handling. The sophisticated computer based system ordering suits well with the nature of the products. Although the alternative sources of supply are available, bidding is not recommended.

This is because the low cost nature of the materials made the bidding unnecessary; and the variety complexity of the materials will make the bidding unaffordable. Strategic Products Strategic products are those components have high level of financial impact to your final product. They are very expansive to develop and manufacture, and often involve high technology contents. They are not usually available in the market place, thus high supply risk.

The buyer will need to contract for the manufacturing rather than pay for the delivery. The examples of these products are engines for automobile and compressor for the refrigerator. For the strategic products, Kraljic proposed a purchasing strategy of performance based partnership. That is to create a partnership relation with the supplier and work together to develop and manufacture the components. The proposal is obviously for good reasons.

This type of components usually is not make to stock it at lease needs to be ordered to the specific requirement, often the components will have to be designed and developed together with the supplier. Hence, strictly speaking, it is no longer the purchasing of products, but rather purchasing of the developing and manufacturing capabilities from the suppliers. That’s why ‘performance based’ is necessary, because it is about the capability.

Bottleneck products Bottleneck products are those components that may or may not cost too much in comparison with the total material cost, but they must have them and they are very difficult to get hold of. The supply risk for those components is high, and the availability of the components is not guaranteed. For example, the small amount of precious metal required for the exhaust purification system is a typical bottleneck material.

Without it, the automobile will not pass the environmental standard and will not be allowed on the road. There are only very few supply in the world that have the blessing of the natural resource for those precious metal. Demand is much higher than supply. For such bottleneck products, Kraljic recommended a purchasing strategy of securing supply plus searching for alternatives.

You must secure your current supply because you have no choice, you must have it; you need to search for alternatives because the constant risk of cut-throat. The alternatives include radical new designs which may use different materials that are not short of supply. This is the relationship setting that the supplier has the up-hand; buyers will have to take some diversions.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 87 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 6.3 Purchasing and Supplier Selection Supplier Selection One of the mission critical tasks of purchasing function is to identify and select the suppliers. This is particularly true when we talk about of strategic components and bottleneck components. In both of these categories, suppliers are by no means ascertained.

The quality of the suppliers and the righteousness of their selection will have direct implications on the supply chain’s long-term competitiveness. The processes of going about selecting suppliers can be suggested as follows, but by no means comprehensive and universal. The processes to go about selecting the suppliers are as follows.

• Set up Selection criteria • Initial contact • Formal evaluation • Price quotation • Financial data • Reference checking • Supplier visit • Audits, assessments or surveys • Initiation test At Navigant, there is no limit to the impact you can have. As you envision your future and all the wonderful rewards your exceptional talents will bring, we offer this simple guiding principle: It’s not what we do. It’s how we do it. Impact matters.

navigant.com ©2013 Navigant Consulting, Inc. All rights reserved. Navigant Consulting is not a certified public accounting firm and does not provide audit, attest, or public accounting services. See navigant.com/licensing for a complete listing of private investigator licenses.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 88 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection Apparently, these processes are mainly around setting and taking measures against the criteria. However, there are three significantly different approaches toward supplier selection. The first is based on the product that the supplier can deliver.

This approach will normally check the product prototype to see if the quality and technical specifications can be met and the delivery terms are satisfactory. The second is based on the capability that the supplier displays. It typical checks whether the supplier has the design and development capability, strategic investment in technology and skills, and up to scratch management.

This capability approach is often used for long-term supplier selection and can be done well before the idea of component is taking shape. The third is the combination of product and capability selection. It applies to when a strategically important new part is to be outsourced to a new supplier.

Not only the supplier must comply with all the product specific requirements but also should have the capability of making future generation of the products in the long run, so as to sustain the supply chain development. Some frequently used criteria for capability filtering are as follows. Assessment criteria on the supplier’s capability: 6.4 • Total quality management policy • BS 5750/ ISO 9000 certification or equivalent • Implementing latest techniques e.g.

JIT, EDI • In-house design capability • Ability to supply locally or world-wide as appropriate • Consistent delivery performance, service standards and product quality • Attitude on total acquisition cost • Willingness to change, flexible attitude of management and workforce • Favourable long term investment plan Tools for Supplier Selection To facilitate the process of supplier selection, quantitative tools are beneficial.

They can make the selection process more rationale; they serve as the platform for meaningful discussion or debate; they provide traceable documents; they form the factual contents for decision-making. Three basic quantitative tools are introduced here for managers to get started on creating their own tools for their own industry and products. The first one is called the ‘categorical method’ as shown in figure 32.

You define the selection criteria first, for example quality, delivery and service; then you make three category judgements: good (+), unsatisfactory (-), and neutral (0) against the criteria for each supplier; finally you sum up the judgement into a total score for each supplier; the highest one will be selected. This method is very simple to apply but is rather subjective.

Hence, it is recommended to form a multi-functional team to make collective judgements in order to limit the bias from individuals. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 89 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection Performance Characteristics Supplier Quality Delivery Service Total A Good (+) Unsatisfactory (-) Neutral (0) 0 B Neutral (0) Good (+) Good (+) ++ C Neutral (0) Unsatisfactory (-) Neutral (0) - Figure 32.

Categorical method The second method is called the ‘cost ratio method’ as shown in figure 33. Similarly you set up the required criteria against the alternative suppliers. What’s different from the categorical method is that it is not entirely based on the people’s subjective judgement. It makes use of some available data on the quality performance; service standard and delivery reliability for instance.

With those historically collected data, you will be able to establish the corresponding cost ratios for each criterion in term of how much the penalty cost needs to be added. The original quoted unit prices from different suppliers will then be adjusted to generate the net-adjusted costs. It then becomes clear that if the supplier selection is based on the original quoted unit price, then the supplier C should be selected because its cost is the lowest.

However, if the supplier selection process takes into account of the suppliers historical performances in the three areas and use the net-adjusted cost, the lowest cost supplier is A not C. The little homework of considering the cost ratio has made very different choice in the selection.

Quality Supplier Cost Ratio (%) Delivery Cost Ratio (%) Service Cost Ratio (%) Total Penalty Ratio (%) Quoted Price/ Unit (£) Net Adjuste d Cost (£) A 2 2 1 5 16.00 16.80 B 5 4 2 11 15.40 17.01 C 7 3 5 15 15.00 17.25 Figure 33. Cost ratio method Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 90 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection The problem with the two methods is that all the criteria are treated equally in the selection process.

This is not really true in real-world business. People have preferences toward different criteria for various reasons. In some circumstances, quality is more important than delivery, and in other situations the delivery is more than quality. The third method takes care of these preferences by assigning a weight to each criterion. It is called the ‘linear-average method’ as shown in figure 34. The weight is a score that reflects the relative importance of the criterion.

The sum of all the weight scores is normally 100. Whatever the judgement score multiplied by the weight become the adjusted judgement score; and then add all the adjusted scores together to generate the total selection score for the supplier. It should be noted that the weight can also be applied to the cost ratio method, or any other method. In the end, the most appropriate supplier selection tool perhaps is the combination of some of those methods.

Selection Weight Criteria Supplier A Supplier B Supplier C Score Total Score Total Score Total Quality 52 8 416 5 260 6 312 Delivery 26 3 78 8 208 3 78 Service 22 5 110 8 176 5 110 Total 604 644 500 Figure 34. Linear -Averaging Method 6.5 Towards Knowledge Based Sourcing Purchasing practice and theory never stops developing. It really is a dynamic and evolving subject in both theory and practice. Looking back at the recent three decades of purchasing development, an evolution pattern starts emerge.

Depend how one would like to take out of it; the pattern may be presented in different ways. Here we frame the evolution pattern into two perspectives, each of which has four key stages. The first perspective is on the operational focuses and the second perspective is mainly on the characteristics changes. The operational focus perspective classifies the purchasing function into four stages: • Stage one can be called ‘Product centred purchasing’.

The operation is basically concentrated exclusively upon the purchasing of the tangible products and its outcomes on the overall businesses. It is usually measured in the five rights (right price, right time, right quantity, right quality and from the right sources). Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 91 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management • Purchasing and Supplier Selection Stage two can be called ‘Process centred purchasing’. It is predominantly process focused operation.

It moves beyond the direct outcomes of the purchasing activities and into the processes through which the outcomes are delivered. This means that the managers realised that the processes are the enablers, and often the controllers of the purchasing outcomes. • Stage three can be called ‘Relational purchasing’. The focus of the operation is not just on the process but also on the inter-organisational relationships.

The relationship has been taken on as the key management instrument to enhance the product quality and technological advances; it also had massive positive impact on the supplier integration and development. • Stage four can be called ‘Performance centred purchasing’. It focuses on the optimum business performances as a whole and managing the purchasing function’s contributions to the overall business performances.

In this way, the purchasing function has been strategically connected to the business’s ultimate objectives and delivery. It is a system approach. The characteristics focus perspective classifies the purchasing function into four stages: • Stage one is ‘passive’ in character. In this stage the purchasing can be defined as lack of strategic directions and is mainly reactive to operational requirements.

High proportion of purchasing manager’s time is on routine operations with low visibility to the supply chain. The supplier selection is based on price and availability only. • Stage two is ‘independent’ in character. In this stage the purchasing may have adopted the latest technology and process, but may have not got the strategy that aligned with the competition.

Links between purchasing and technical disciplines may have been established; performance based on cost reduction; top management recognises the importance of professional development and the opportunities in purchasing contributing to profitability. • Stage three is ‘supportive’ in character. Purchasing starts to support firm’s competitive strategy by adopting purchasing techniques and products which strengthen the firm’s competitive position. Suppliers are considered as key competitive resource.

The supply market, products evolution and suppliers capabilities are continuously monitored and analysed. • Stage four is ‘integrative’ in character. In this stage purchasing strategy fully integrates with firm’s purchasing function. Multifunctional teams and cross functional training of purchasing professional begin to take hold. Open and close communication with other functional departments is hard wired into the processes.

Purchasing is measured in terms of its contribution to the overall success of the firm. It is interesting to notice that the four stages in both perspectives can be broadly matched with little obvious impediment. However, it will take a more rigorous approach to declare the theoretical match and to create a new stage model for the purchasing development. The discussion presented here merely opens the scope of discussion and hopefully stimulate further thinking and debate.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 92 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Purchasing and Supplier Selection But there is no doubt that the purchasing function has now become a much more sophisticated process and has much wider and deeper impact to the business performance. It is moving away from the short-term towards long-term; from a function to processes; from transactional to relational; from cost saving to performance enhancing.

The picture of purchasing in the future perhaps can be described as the knowledge-based purchasing, which is built on the knowledge about whole business objectives and stakeholders’ interest, the knowledge about the suppliers and their capabilities and potential, the knowledge about the people and their emotion towards relationship and culture; and the knowledge about technology up-taking.

> Apply now redefine your future - © Photononstop AxA globAl grAduAte progrAm 2015 axa_ad_grad_prog_170x115.indd 1 Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 19/12/13 16:36 93 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration 7 Relationship and Integration 7.1 Supply Relationship Defined Supply relationship can be defined as the cross organisational interaction and exchange between the participating members of the supply chain.

This means that the relationship is between organisations not individual people within the same supply chain where the material flows defines the boundary. However for the inter-organisational interaction that falls outside of the main streams of the material flows, then it may not be called collaborative relationship or partnership relation, but may not be the supply relationship. Supply relationship can be either on the upstream side with the suppliers or on the downstream side with the buyers.

If the relationship is solely observed between one supply and one buyer, it is also called dyadic relationship. One of the most common organisational relationships is what’s called the partnership relation. A partnership is defined as a specific relationship arrangement where parties agree to cooperate to advance their mutual interests. Since humans are social beings partnerships between individuals, businesses, organisations, and varied combinations thereof, have always been commonplace.

In the most frequent instance, a partnership is formed between two or more businesses in which partners cooperated to achieve and share business advancement and profits or losses. In supply chain management, relationship between the participating members is in fact more a dimension rather than an element.

This means that supply relationship cannot be understood as something that you either have it or you don’t; instead it is a dimension from which various different relationship postures can be identified, such as arm’s length relation; shortterm contractual relationship, long-term partnership relation and so on. It is almost like a variable that may take different values under different circumstances. Then the question is how, in practice, one might measure the ‘value’ of relationship?

This is a difficult question. Amongst many known attempts, a relatively more convincing one is that if a relationship is a form of interaction and exchange, then a specific relationship can be measured by the contents of the exchange.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 94 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration Since relationship is ultimately about exchange, and hence, so long as we know what has been exchanged in between we should be able to pigeonhole it to a specific type.

For example, if the buyer and supplier have only exchanged on the price and volume of the goods, we can very safely assess that they are having an arm’s length relationship; on the other hand if the two companies have been exchange their vision, mission and value, have joint design and product development and coordinated production and so on, one can safely assess that the relationship between them is close and highly engaging.

7.2 Close Partnership The traditional supplier-buyer relationship has been limited to almost single point contact of purchasing officer on the buyer side and the sales person on the supplier side. The purchasing decision is largely based on the unit price. Information sharing is very limited if not at all in existence. The relationship tends to be antagonistic and adversarial. The close partnership relation with suppliers was first practiced in the Toyota led Japanese automotive industry.

It had profound influence on Western assemblers and is now a dominant school of thought in supply relationships. The basic practices of the Japanese close partnership with suppliers involve many aspects of supply chain management. • First they reduced their supplier basis and form tiered supply network structure. As a result, the buyer can then focus much smaller number of 1st-tier suppliers; more time and other resources can be focused on them to develop much closer relationships.

• They use long term contract with their suppliers. Not only the long-term contract stabilises the contractual relationship, but also psychologically it is a statement of trust and good-will intention which seldom fail to entice a higher level of commitment. • Single sourcing is preferred to dual sourcing or multiple sourcing, taking advantage of volume consolidation, coupled with greater subcontracting to suppliers. This shift has seen the vertical disintegration of the industry.

• They get the suppliers involved earlier in the new product introduction process. Suppliers can then contributing their expertise to design and engineering of the new products, adding substantial value to the supply chain. Some of the suppliers’ designers and engineers may reside in the premises of the assembler, creating much closer relationship. • They move away from price based purchasing towards quality-driven purchasing.

Putting tremendous amount of effort in working with the suppliers closely to achieve the ‘zero-defect’ target as part of their TQM campaign. • They developed the JIT production system, which require close integration of suppliers and buyers production system. Supplier’s capacity is synchronised with the buyer’s; and the production scheduling is coordinated to ensure smooth flow of materials and low or no inventories along the processes.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 95 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration The current emphasis on the close relational exchange represents a departure from the former transactional focus widely practiced in the Western industries, which is characterised by the short-term gains and limited communications and no collaboration. The close relationship is concerned with long-term partnerships and long-term gains for the whole supply chain.

It is a shared destiny relationship with suppliers. It is often developed incrementally between the buyer and supper over time. Research suggests that the concept of trust and commitment are pivotal to the relationship’s success. Trust is defined as ‘the willingness to rely on an exchange partner in whom one has confidence. It is thought to be the binding force in most productive buyer-supplier relationships.

Lamming (1993) proposed a nine factors model to summarise the key success factors of the close partnership between supplier and buyer, which could be helpful as a benchmark for supply relationship development.

1) The nature of competition • Global operation and local presence • Based upon contributions to product technology • Combination of Organic growth, merger and acquisition • Dependent upon alliance/collaboration 2) Basis of sourcing decision • Small supply base • Supplier selection not just on bid price • Single and dual sourcing • Re-sourcing as a last resort • Earlier involvement of established suppliers 3) Role of information exchange • True transparency: cost etc.

• Two-ways: discussion of cost and volumes • Technical and commercial information exchange • Kanban system for production deliveries 4) Management of capacity • Synchronised capacity • Flexibility to operate with fluctuations 5) Delivery practice • Just-in-time delivery • Local, distance and international JIT Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 96 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration 6) Dealing with price changes • Price reductions based on cost reductions • Joint efforts form a key part of information exchange in lean supply • There is a combination of working pressure and co-operation, coupled with transparency in costing 7) Attitude to quality • Supplier vetting system become redundant • Mutual agreement on quality targets • Continual interaction and Kaizen • Perfect quality as a goal (such as 6σ, and zero-defects) 8) Role of R&D • Integrated assembler and supplier • Long-term development of components system 9) Level of pressure • Very high for both customer and supplier • Self-imposed • Not culturally specific In the past four years we have drilled 89,000 km That’s more than twice around the world.

Who are we? We are the world’s largest oilfield services company1. Working globally—often in remote and challenging locations— we invent, design, engineer, and apply technology to help our customers find and produce oil and gas safely. Who are we looking for? Every year, we need thousands of graduates to begin dynamic careers in the following domains: n Engineering, Research and Operations n Geoscience and Petrotechnical n Commercial and Business What will you be?

careers.slb.com Based on Fortune 500 ranking 2011. Copyright © 2015 Schlumberger. All rights reserved. 1 Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 97 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 7.3 Relationship and Integration Strategic Alliance Strategic alliance is defined as an informal or formal arrangement between two or more companies with a common business objective.

They are seen as a manifestation of inter-organisational cooperative strategies that entails pooling of skills and resources by the alliance partners in order to achieve one or more goals linked to the strategic objectives of the cooperating firms. They usually will take one of the three structural types: • Horizontal alliance: that is between companies on the same level of different supply chains, which is also referred to as inter-channel alliances.

• Vertical alliance: that is between the firms on the different levels of the same supply chain, which also referred to as the intra-channel alliances. • Lateral alliance: that is developed between the client company and logistics service provider firms. Those logistics providers usually will serve many different supply chains and thus they are often seen from any supply chain as the ‘lateral’ rather than internal.

Companies embarked on the business of strategic alliances do so for many reasons: • Sharing complementary resources • Sharing market risks • Achieve economy of scale and economy of scope • Joint development and collaboration • Create value through synergy as the partners achieve mutually benefit gains that neither would be able to achieve individually • Cost saving and customer value adding Strategic alliances between businesses usually do not start by the ‘love at the first sight’.

They must be contemplated and planned dispassionately, and they call for a continuous process of initiation and development. Statistics show that 70% of newly created strategic alliances decease within one year of operation. This may not be as alarming as it sounds. Alliances, perhaps, are supposed to be so. Strategic alliance is fundamentally informal to start with and will certainly enjoy a cosy but flexible relationship.

It is perfectly alright for the parties to decease the alliance without costing them an arm or leg if the experience is not what was expected. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 98 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration Figure 35.

Continuous processes of alliance development As illustrated in the diagram, the starting point is the matching of the strategic intent of both parties, which is based on their careful analysis and decisions in respect to the strategic choice and supply chain configuration at a high level. The strategic intention of alliance can only become the reality when the agreed alliance is implemented and put to practice.

But the implementation is usually facilitated, affected, or constrained by many factors (the 4 Cs, in the model) including the whether the two parties have compatible goals, cooperative culture, complementary skills and commensurate risks. If all goes well the alliance is expected to produce some positive result through synergy; and they are usually evaluated on the value-adding, efficiency and effectiveness, cost, and shred risks.

The evaluated results of the alliance will then be reviewed to see if they have met both parties’ strategic intentions. That completes the cycle of alliance development model. It is anticipated that continuing success of the alliance will rely on the continuing process of those described steps. 7.4 Relationship Dilemma Why close partnership is so great?

We ask this question because the validity of the close partnership appears to have not been challenged, and most of the times it has been pursued as a best practice almost religiously. Most of supply chain relationship literatures appear to be in the same vein; practitioner world zealously follow the close partnership as the principal developed from the lean supply chain model.

The resultant phenomenon is that we all choose to practice the close partnership without questioning its merit in all circumstances, and that could be dangerous. Here, we are going to investigate the three relationship dilemmas in order to have more thorough understanding of the issue. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 99 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration Dilemma No.1 Relationship could often run into a dilemma between cooperation of and non-cooperation.

The well known prisoner’s dilemma game (figure x)vividly illustrates this phenomenon. Two suspects are arrested by the police. The police have insufficient evidence for a conviction, and, having separated the prisoners, visit each of them to offer the same deal. If one testifies for the prosecution against the other (defects) and the other remains silent (cooperates), the defector goes free and the silent accomplice receives the full one-year sentence.

If both remain silent, both prisoners are sentenced to only one month in jail for a minor charge. If each betrays the other, each receives a three-month sentence. Each prisoner must choose to betray the other or to remain silent. Each one is assured that the other would not know about the betrayal before the end of the investigation. How should the prisoners act? Figure 36.

Prisoner’s dilemma The prisoner’s dilemma is a fundamental problem in game theory that demonstrates why two people might not cooperate even if it is in both their best interests to do so. In this game, as in most game theory, the only concern of each individual player (prisoner) is maximizing his or her own payoff, without any concern for the other player’s payoff.

The unique equilibrium for this game is that the rational choice leads the two players to both play defect, even though each player’s individual reward would be greater if they both played cooperatively. This scenario of dilemma does sound very familiar in supplier buyer relationship. The trust may leave the business vulnerable to the onslaught of betrayal; but the betrayal will surely destroy the collaboration, that’s the dilemma.

Dilemma No.2 Relationship-based supply chain collaboration and integration often run into the dilemma between positive gains and negative constraint from the same loyalty and closeness of the relationship. A well-developed, high-involvement supplier buyer relationship is at the heart of a supply chain’s survival and is the basis of its growth and development. This is because the close relationship cultivates a culture of trust, creates synergy in collaboration and ensures operational efficiency.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 100 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration But the high-involvement relationship also ties the company into its current ways of operating and restricts its capacity to change. The close partnerships are designed to be got rid of very easily. Trusted commitment is for the long-term. Cut short of close relationship unilaterally could be seen as a moral betrayal, and losing face is even harder to accept.

Supplier buyer close relationship is, therefore for a company, both a powerful driver for development and the cage that imprisons it. The existing close relationship with the buyer, and the psychological commitment to it, could be a major constraint for the supply chain to engage with better suppliers when opportunities arise.

Dilemma No.3 Relationship development will always have the dilemma between the level of commitment or cost on relationship and the level of benefit gained from the close partnership. The commitment and cost is the investment the company has to make in order to get closer with its supplier, which include all the activities and expenditures associated with it; and the benefit is everything and anything that contribute to the stakeholders’ interests.

Shown in figure 37, the benefit-gain (indicated by the blue line) from the supplier buyer relationship increases when the relationship gets closer, this is proven by numerous business cases. However, when the relationship gets too close, the gain of benefits may not continue to rise proportionally (the blue line dips a little at the end). Nevertheless, the cost including all the invested commitment, time and money increase all the way when the relationship gets closer.

The high level of engagement in all sorts of activities incurs costs (as shown by the green line). Combining the benefit curve and cost curve together, i.e. take the costs away from the benefit we arrive at a economics model for relationships. This model shown by the orange line depicted the cost and benefit dilemma in determining the level of engagement or the closeness of supplier and buyer relationship.

Three key rules can be derived from the model: • The closer the more cost; are you prepare to pay or commit to the relationship? • Over certain level of closeness the cost will surpass the benefit, and become uneconomical; never over-kill; enthusiasm must be tamed by reason. • There always be an optimum level of closeness in the economic zone, where the effectiveness (benefit over cost) is at its highest.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 101 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration Figure 37. Relationship dilemma on cost and benefit STUDY. PLAY. The stuff you'll need to make a good living The stuff that makes life worth living NORWAY. YOUR IDEAL STUDY DESTINATION.

WWW.STUDYINNORWAY.NO FACEBOOK.COM/STUDYINNORWAY Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 102 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 7.5 Relationship and Integration Supply Chain Integration Close relationship between the members of the supply chain is an indispensible part of the supply chain integration, and supply chain integration is an indispensible part of business success.

I firm needs to develop effective coordination within and beyond its boundaries in order to maximise the potential for converting competitive advantage into profitability. That basically is what supply chain integration is all about. Conceptually, supply chain integration means that the legally independent participating firms coordinate seamlessly together as if they one company in order to achieve the common goal.

An integrated supply chain will coordinate the order fulfilment to match actual consumption at the end of the supply chain, and synchronise the suppliers’ production to ensure the timely delivery of the products to the right place at the right time and with the right price. Wal-Mart, for instance, shares point-of-sales data including sales and stocking data with its key suppliers.

Tracking daily sales enables the suppliers to differentiate popular from slow-moving items and to respond quickly either to replenish or to discontinue the items in retail stores. Tight coordination between Wal-Mart and its key suppliers dramatically increases product availability and reduces inventory costs. The figure 38 shows a framework of supply chain integration.

It looks at the product flow that goes through a typical supply chain, which has the manufacturer as the focal company in the middle, involving two tiers of suppliers upstream and two tiers of customers downstream. On top of everything else, the information flow through the supply chain is the essential infrastructure for the integration. The contents of the integration are managed through 8 dimensions.

• Customer relationship management • Customer service management • Demand management • Order fulfilment • Manufacturing flow management • Supplier relationship management • Product development and commercialisation • Returns management Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 103 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management Relationship and Integration Figure 38.

Supply chain integration framework Coordination among independent firms, such as raw-material suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, third-party logistics providers and retailers, is the key to attaining the flexibility necessary to enable them to progressively improve supply chain processes in response to rapidly changing market conditions. Poor coordination among the chain members can cause dysfunctional operational performance.

Some of the negative consequences of poor coordination include inventory costs, longer delivery times, higher transportation costs, higher levels of loss and damage, and lowered customer service. Since the supply chain members are largely independent, the changes that occur in any of them are likely to affect the performance of the others and the supply chain as a whole. The performance of the supply chain thus is always the ‘integrated’ performance, with or without management influence, i.e.

the supply chain is inter-linked one way or the other albeit very complex. However, to improve the overall supply chain performance to a desired level, a coordinated effort must be taken. A coordinated action not only has proven useful, but perhaps is the only effective approach to mitigate demand variability and excess inventories in the process.

If supply chain integration is about the process of planning, executing and controlling the interdependence of activities carried out by different supply chain members or business units in order to create value for the end consumer, then supply chain management is basically managing the supply chain integration. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 104 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management The Future Challenges 8 The Future Challenges What’s the future holds for supply chain management?

The future of supply chain management is the future of the business management when there will be no business that is not part of a supply chain. The paradigm of business management will soon be converged to the paradigm of supply chain management. To precisely fortune-tell the future of supply chains is meaningless. But what’s useful is to identify and explore some challenges that we better prepare ourselves for. Three key challenges have been identified and discussed here.

8.1 Creating Customer Centric Supply Chain The first challenge that the supply chain managers are facing is to transform the supply chains from supplier-centric to customer-centric. Traditionally, supply chains have been developed from factory outwards so that the company’s business model may be continued without major change. The management emphasis was on how to ensure the production process could be most efficiently run and products could be most cost effectively distributed.

The marketing is to find the customer that fit to the products rather than to make the products that fit to the market. In today’s highly competitive global market place, the market favours whichever the supply chain that satisfies them best. The strategic aim of the supply chains must be on the higher levels of customer responsiveness. Thus the agility rather than the cost becomes the key diver. The supply chains must be designed to get the customer on the driving seat.

Coordination and operational integration of the supply chain members must be significantly strengthened to counterbalance the increased volatility of market behaviour. It is anticipated that there will be a culture change towards the 21st Century supply chain management. This change, which is already underway, is expected to transform the business model from supplier centric to customer centric.

The customer centricity idea represents a renewed paradigm that will have profound implications through every aspect of supply chain management. Research shows that close connectivity to customer will significantly improve supply chain effectiveness and market performance. Traditionally, this task of customer connection is left to only small part of the supply chain. Dealers and service/repair shops have most information about the consumer, with OEMs and suppliers having the least.

However, in future’s supply chain, more information is shared across the network. With online communities, embedded systems, connected online configuration and ordering the future supply chain will have more information about consumers than ever before. More importantly, it will have better intelligent analytics to synthesize and use the information. Across industries, demand planning with customers in the centre will become a standard process for synchronizing supply and demand.

Customer centricity also will play a pivotal role in customer collaboration on product innovation. Already more and more supply chains support customer product configuration and specification, and collaborate extensively with customers on product design. While many models of organizational effectiveness can be used for transforming the organisation, one that has persisted is the McKinsey 7S framework.

Developed in the early 1980s by Tom Peters and Robert Waterman, two consultants working at the McKinsey & Company consulting firm, the basic premise of the model is that there are seven internal aspects of an organization that need to be aligned if it is to be successful. Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 105 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management The Future Challenges Three of those are what they call the “Hard” elements and four are “Soft” ones.

The “hard” elements are easier to define or identify. The management can directly influence them. These are strategy statements; organization charts and reporting lines; and formal processes and IT systems. The “soft” elements, on the other hand, can be more difficult to describe, and are less tangible and more influenced by culture. However, these soft elements are as important as the hard elements if the organization is going to be successful. We ask you WHERE DO YOU WANT TO BE?

TomTom is a place for people who see solutions when faced with problems, who have the energy to drive our technology, innovation, growth along with goal achievement. We make it easy for people to make smarter decisions to keep moving towards their goals. If you share our passion - this could be the place for you. Founded in 1991 and headquartered in Amsterdam, we have 3,600 employees worldwide and sell our products in over 35 countries.

For further information, please visit tomtom.jobs Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 106 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management The Future Challenges Let’s look at each of the elements specifically to see how a customer-centric supply chain can be achieved: • Strategy: from the top of the organisation a customer oriented strategy must be drawn and put to be communicated throughout the organisation.

The strategy must include how the organisation should align its strategy with the suppliers and customers to have the visibility and responsiveness to the end-consumers’ demand. • Structure: For the organisation, horizontal dynamic structure that aligned to products and market segment is more preferred that the vertical hierarchical reporting lines; for the supply chain, networked flexible structure with small span of vertical integration is more responsive to the customer demand.

• Systems: the procedures and daily activities must be in tune with market sentiment; customer complaints and request must be dealt with by a fixed routine procedure systematically; a joint forecasting and new product introduction process should be established collaboratively across the supply chain.

• Shared value: customer service and customer value must be enshrined in the core organisational value; it should become the culture and second nature for people to act on anything relate to the customer and endconsumer at the highest priority. • Style: the leadership style adopted must fit the culture of customer orientation and customer-centric. The leaders and management team should ‘walk the talk’ and become the role model in caring about the customer.

• Staff: the employee and their capabilities are the assets of the organisation. People are the only active force in caring and serving the customer. The change of organisational performance is almost entirely dependent on the changes of people’s understanding, knowledge and attitude.

• Skills: the quality of the products, the level of customer satisfaction, rely on the skills of the workforce, which in turn determines the organisation’s and supply chain’s competences in delivering the products and services. 8.2 Managing Supply Networks The second challenge is to take on the whole supply network and manage it as an integrated entity.

Managers see the only legitimate platform for them to exercise control is their own organisation, beyond which is the supply chain they participated. This limited scope of business management is to be and has already been challenged. Companies will not stand alone in the competition. Like it or not the competition will only be waged with supply chain against supply chain. The survival of the supply chain is the survival of the organisations in it.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 107 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management The Future Challenges Therefore the new competitive paradigm place the firm in the middle of an interdependent network – a confederation of mutually complementary competencies and capabilities – which competes as an integrated supply chain against other supply chains.

To manage in such a radically revised competitive structure clearly requires different skills and competencies than those used in the traditional structure. To achieve future global market leadership in the networked competitive environment necessitates a network focused management model and the associated management processes. One of the key cognitive characteristics of any network is its configurative structure, which specifies how a supply chain is constructed in terms of its flow model.

Such network structure dimension determines how big the supply base is; how wide the extent of vertical integration is; how much its level of outsourcing is; where the suppliers are located; how close the dyadic relationships are; what the channels of connection for the network are; and etc.. As it happens, globalisation has, amongst many other forces, propelled some unprecedented shifts in network structure and configuration.

Evidences from numerous surveys and case studies show that more and more leading edge enterprises are outsourcing more strategically important functions and vertically disintegrating the supply chain to geographically, economically and culturally remote destinations. Such a momentum has inevitably given rise to some new challenges in reshaping the network management. Business strategies formulation must be carried out collectively with the network members.

A significantly higher level of joint strategic development is required in order for the network to be truly effective. Another challenge is for the networks to break free from the often adversarial nature of buyer-supplier relationships. There is now a growing realisation that co-operation between network partners usually leads to improved performance generally. The result of the improved performance needs to be shared between the members of the network to achieve what’s called ‘win-win’.

Developing the shared information system for the network management is another challenge. Forecasting information, capacity information, and production information can all be collectively managed to reduce the inventory levels and achieve shorter lead-time and JIT delivery. Throughout the supply the material flows are gradually to be displaced by the information flow.

Whilst the supply network becomes leaner in terms of less redundant materials in the process, the investment in the information systems and its management gets increasingly higher. Coordinating the IT system compatibility, software upgrading, maintenance and service could be resource hungry. However the gain in the much more coordinated operation and supply chain responsiveness is understood to be worth the cost.

As supply network complexity and uncertainty becomes ever more persistent the challenges also ripple out to the supply chain risk management. This is particularly true when supply chains become more reliant on virtual networks. The emerging future model of risk management for supply chains cannot be a scheme of buying an insurance policy; nor would it be an experience of gambling.

Companies that aspire for the supply chain leadership position in the future will be those who mitigate the risk by building various forms of reserves, including inventory, capacity, redundant suppliers, but in the meantime maintaining a competitive strength in business efficiency and responsiveness. Managers thus must keep a vigilant eye on the trade-off between the risk and the cost of building a reserve to mitigate it.

With so many related risks and risk-mitigation approaches to consider, it is suggested that managers must do two things when they begin to construct a supply network risk management strategy. First, they must create a shared organisationwide understanding of supply-chain risk. Then they must determine how to adapt general risk-mitigation approaches to the circumstances of their particular company.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 108 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management 8.3 The Future Challenges Watch the Dynamics The third challenge is how to survive the dynamics of the never ending supply chain evolution. The future of supply chain will face unprecedented dynamics in terms of structural dynamics, technological dynamics, and relationship dynamics, to say the least.

Structural dynamics From a system dynamics point of view, the flow structure of a supply chain is a typical dynamic system with lows and stock; there are feedbacks and delays. From managerial experience perspective, it is even more so; there are fluctuations of demand, overproduction, high inventory, capacity miss-match, backlogs of unfulfilled orders, delayed delivery and so on. The trouble is that the supply structure is growingly more complex, and market volatility is set to increase too.

There is little doubt the dynamic behaviour of a supply chain is only to be exacerbated. A number of factors are at play, which is continuously contributing to the increased structural dynamics. • The first factor is that business around the world is becoming more specialised, and they become so rightly for their competitive advantages, utilisation of resources and returns on investment. This trend is leading to more inter-connections of the specialised operation in the supply chain networks.

Specialisation gives rise to the need of coordination in between. Thus increase the complexity of the system and more triggers for dynamic changes. • The geographical expansion of supply chains around world also exacerbates the dynamic behaviour, as the delays in logistics and visibilities are worsened. It has also brought in the unstable factors such as different legal and financial systems, cultural and religious conflicts, indigenous market related ethical issues.

• The rapid growing environmental concerns around world have already started to reshape the supply chains. Not only the resourcing strategies, but also the production and logistics processes have felt the significant impact. Carbon footprint has become the KPI for many supply chains across industries, which they never heard of in just few years back. Consequently, the structure of the supply chains will have to change.

Technological dynamics Innovation and technology advancement have been great news for the business and the consumers alike in most cases. But the changeover to new technologies can be a very painful process as it induces series of dynamic changes to the supply chains. All too often the disruptive technology advancement decease the existing operating model and invalidates the existing markets.

The changing dynamics that have been enforced upon the supply chain can be observed from number of directions: • Sudden change of competition landscape when the new technology advancement has helped the competitors to update their offering to the market.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 109 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management • The Future Challenges The manufacture may be forced to switch the suppliers due to the desperate need of the new technology in the supply base in order to keep competitive. • Sudden arise of the new investment requirement due to the pressure to upgrade the equipments and facilities to cater the new technology. • Unfolding a significant skill gap in the workforce due to the unpreparedness of the technology.

Relationship dynamics Many people believe the operating core of supply chain management is that of relationships with the suppliers and buyers including the end consumers. Hence, the external business relationship management for a company has become the centre piece of today’s and arguably the future’s supply chain management.

However the conceptual alignment of this concept in the academic as well as the practitioners’ circles has always been a quagmire, as there are many apparently conflicting approaches towards managing the relationships.

Find and follow us: http://twitter.com/bioradlscareers www.linkedin.com/groupsDirectory, search for Bio-Rad Life Sciences Careers http://bio-radlifesciencescareersblog.blogspot.com John Randall, PhD Senior Marketing Manager, Bio-Plex Business Unit Bio-Rad is a longtime leader in the life science research industry and has been voted one of the Best Places to Work by our employees in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Bring out your best in one of our many positions in research and development, sales, marketing, operations, and software development. Opportunities await — share your passion at Bio-Rad! www.bio-rad.com/careers Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 110 Click on the ad to read more Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management The Future Challenges It is now emerging, that no single existing relationship model so far can possibly serve all business needs because of the underlying dynamism.

There are basically two key dynamisms in the relationship management, one is the portfolio dynamism and the other is longitudinal dynamism. The portfolio dynamism addresses a portfolio different relationship approaches that fit to a corresponding portfolio of business models.

Thus, in often times, business will need to harness with a number of different supply chain relationships to different suppliers based on product categories, market segmentations, development strategies, and financial circumstances and so on. The longitudinal dynamism addresses the changing relationship posture along the time continuum. In this way the relationship management becomes a powerful instrument to achieve the supply chain responsiveness and supply chain agility.

It is anticipated that the future supply relationship management will hinge on a combined approach that addresses both the portfolio and longitudinal dynamisms. How to survive the supply chain dynamics? The Triple-A supply chain model proposed by Professor Hau Lee (2007) from Stanford University is a useful blueprint to survive the supply chain dynamics. • The triple-A stands for Agility, Adaptability and Alignment.

A supply chain must be agile enough in order to respond quickly to the dynamics of demand fluctuations and sudden changes of supply. The agility is a supply chain capability that handles the unexpected external disruptions smoothly and cost effectively. It enables the supply chain to survive the impact of the external dynamics and be able to recover from any initial shocks.

• Adaptability differs from the agility in that it deals with more long-term and fundamental changes in the overall external environment, which is often irreversible. Adaptability calls for organisation and its supply chain to embark on major strategic changes in technology, market positioning, radical skill upgrading and competence shift. It helps the supply chain to survive the long waves of external dynamics.

• Alignment is a supply chain capability that coordinates and balances the interests of all members. It addresses the supply chain’s internal dynamics and ensures the supply chain to remain as a stable and cohesive whole. It also means to align all the complimentary resources and optimise the operational effectiveness and relationship to deliver the competitive advantage.

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com 111 Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management References 9 References Christopher, M 2005, Logistics and supply chain management – creating value-adding networks, 3dt Ed. FT Prentice Hall, London. Fisher, M 1997, “What is the right supply chain for your product?”, Harvard Business Review, March/April. Frohlich, MT and Westbrook, R 2001, “Arcs of integration: an international study of supply chain strategies”, Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 19, pp. 185-200.

Gattorna, J 2006, Living supply chains – how to mobilize the enterprise around delivering what your customers want, FT Prentice Hall, London. Harrison, A &Van Hoek, R 2011, Logistics management and strategy – competing through the supply chain, 4th Ed. FT Prentice Hall, London. Harrison, A, Christopher, M & Van Hoek, R 1999, “Creating the agile supply chain”, School of Management Working Paper, Cranfield University, Cranfield. Hines, P & Taylor, D 2000, Going lean.

Lean Enterprise Research Centre, Cardiff Business School, Cardiff, UK. Kim, WC, Mauborgne R. 2005, Blue Ocean Strategy. Harvard Business School Press: Boston. Lamming, R 1993, Beyond Partnership, Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall. Lee, HL 2006, “The triple-A supply chain”, Harvard business review on supply chain management, page 87-116. Harvard Business School Press, New York. Lu, D 2011, In Pursuit of World Class Excellence, Ventus Publishing Aps, Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Slack, N Johnston, S 2006, Operations Management, 5th Edition, Prentice Hall, London 112

